3 Do You Remember ?
4 Jehovah Provides Comfort in All Our Trials
Though we all face trials and tribulations , Jehovah provides the comfort we need .
This article reviews vital provisions that we can use to receive true comfort now and in the future .
9 Set Your Heart on Spiritual Treasures
This article will help us to apply a lesson that Jesus taught in the illustration about a merchant seeking pearls .
It will also help us to analyze our personal view of the lifesaving ministry that Christians have been assigned and the truths that we have learned over the years .
14 Can You Look Beyond Outward Appearances ?
16 Will You Resolve Conflicts and Promote Peace ?
21 “ Blessed Be Your Good Sense ! ”
22 Keep Your Eyes on the Big Issue
27 Uphold Jehovah’s Sovereignty !
In the rush of life , it is easy to lose sight of what is important .
These articles will help us to appreciate the importance of Jehovah’s sovereignty and to understand how we can uphold it .
32 Did You Know ?
“ The God of all comfort . . . comforts us in all our trials . ” ​ — 2 COR .
1 : 3 , 4 .
SONGS : 33 , 41
Why can we expect that marriage and family life will involve some trials ?
How did prayer prove to be of comfort to some mentioned in the Bible ?
What can you do to provide comfort to others ?
1 , 2 .
How does Jehovah comfort us in our trials , and what assurance does his Word provide ?
A YOUNG single brother , whom we will call Eduardo , spoke of his concerns with Stephen , an older married elder .
Eduardo had been thinking about what we read at 1 Corinthians 7 : 28 : “ Those who [ marry ] will have tribulation in their flesh . ”
He asked , “ What is this ‘ tribulation , ’ and how would I deal with it if I marry ? ”
Before addressing that question , Stephen asked Eduardo to consider something else that the apostle Paul wrote , namely , that Jehovah is “ the God of all comfort , who comforts us in all our trials [ “ tribulation , ” ftn . ] . ” ​ — 2 Cor .
1 : 3 , 4 .
Jehovah is indeed a loving Father , and he comforts us when we face difficulties .
You may personally have had experiences in which God provided you with support and guidance , often through his Word .
We can be sure that he wants the best for us , as he did for his servants in the past . ​ — Read Jeremiah 29 : 11 , 12 .
What questions will we address ?
Understandably , we are in a better position to cope if we can identify the causes of our problems or tribulations .
And that is true of tribulation related to married life or to family life .
What , then , are some of the realities that may bring on the ‘ tribulation in the flesh ’ that Paul mentioned ?
What examples from both Bible times and our time can help us to find the comfort we need ?
Knowing this will help us to cope .
4 , 5 .
What are some causes of ‘ tribulation in the flesh ’ ?
We can read what God said near the start of human history : “ A man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife , and they will become one flesh . ”
Jehovah said that when he performed the first human marriage .
Yet , under imperfect conditions , getting married and setting up a new household can strain family relationships .
Usually , parental authority is being replaced by the authority of the husband .
God authorizes him to exercise headship over his wife .
Some new husbands and wives do not find this to be easy .
According to God’s Word , a wife is to accept that she will be directed by her husband rather than by her parents .
Relationships with in - laws may become strained and cause tribulation for the newlyweds .
New anxieties often surface after a wife announces to her husband , “ We are going to have a baby . ”
Usually , a couple’s joy over their prospective child is tinged with some apprehension about medical issues that may arise during the pregnancy or later . And there will be an economic impact to consider , both immediate and long - term .
More adjustments become necessary when the baby arrives .
The new mother’s time and attention may be focused on caring for her child .
Many a husband has felt left out because his wife is occupied with her duties toward their baby .
On the other hand , a new father has new responsibilities to shoulder .
His duties increase because he has a new family member to care for and provide for .
6 - 8 .
How can an unfulfilled desire to have children cause distress ?
A different sort of tribulation confronts some married couples .
They desperately want children but remain childless .
When the wife does not become pregnant , she may feel much emotional distress .
Neither marriage nor childbearing guarantees freedom from cares , yet an unfulfilled desire for children is in its own way a ‘ tribulation in the flesh . ’
In Bible times , barrenness often carried a stigma .
Rachel , Jacob’s wife , expressed anguish at seeing her sister have children .
Missionaries serving in lands where it is customary to have large families are often asked why they do not have children .
Despite their logical and tactful explanation , the reaction may be , “ Oh , we will pray for you ! ”
Or consider the case of a sister in England who very much wanted a child but whose hopes in that regard had not been fulfilled .
Then she entered the change of life .
She admitted that she felt devastated , for she realized that her desire would not be satisfied in this system of things .
She and her husband decided to adopt a child .
Nonetheless , she said : “ I still went through a sort of grieving process . I knew that adoption would not be exactly the same as giving birth to my own child . ”
The Bible does mention a Christian woman’s being “ kept safe through childbearing . ”
But this does not mean that giving birth or having children results in gaining everlasting life .
Rather , it refers to the fact that a woman’s having children to tend to , along with the other aspects of caring for a household , may keep her from falling into a pattern of gossiping and meddling in others ’ affairs .
However , she may still face tribulations linked to marriage and family life .
How can a person cope with the loss of a loved one ?
( See paragraphs 9 , 12 )
How is losing a marriage mate in death a distinct trial ?
When referring to tribulations associated with marriage , there is one that may not readily come to mind . The death of a loved one .
Yes , a distinct trial that many have faced is that of losing a beloved marriage mate in death .
This is a trial that the survivor may not have expected to face in this system of things .
Christians firmly believe Jesus ’ promise of a coming resurrection .
What does that prospect do for the surviving mate ?
It offers a considerable amount of comfort .
This is another way that our loving Father , through his Word , offers support and comfort to those experiencing tribulation .
Let us now consider how some servants of God have felt ​ — and benefited from — ​ the comfort that Jehovah provides .
How did Hannah find relief from distress ?
( See opening picture . )
Hannah , a beloved wife of Elkanah , faced a particular trial . She remained barren while Elkanah’s other wife , Peninnah , produced offspring .
( Read 1 Samuel 1 : 4 - 7 . )
Hannah was taunted by Peninnah “ year after year . ”
That caused Hannah great anguish and distress .
She sought relief by taking the matter to Jehovah in prayer .
Indeed , “ she prayed for a long time before Jehovah . ”
Did she expect Jehovah to grant her request ?
She must have hoped so .
In any event , “ her face was no longer downcast . ”
She trusted that Jehovah would either put an end to her barrenness or fill the lack in some other way .
How can prayer provide us with comfort ?
Trials and tribulations will continue as long as we are imperfect and are in this system under Satan’s control .
How good it is to know , though , that Jehovah is “ the God of all comfort ” !
One way that we can receive help to deal with our personal trials or tribulations is through prayer . Hannah poured out her heart to Jehovah .
Similarly , in the face of tribulation , we need to do more than simply mention to Jehovah how we feel .
We need to supplicate him , yes , to convey our feelings by praying intensely from the heart . ​ — Phil .
4 : 6 , 7 .
What helped the widow Anna to find joy ?
Even if we feel a deep void in our life ​ — whether from childlessness or from the death of a loved one — ​ we can still gain comfort .
In Jesus ’ day , the prophetess Anna lost her husband after only seven years of marriage .
The Bible account makes no mention of any children .

What was Anna still doing at 84 years of age ?
Luke 2 : 37 states : “ She was never missing from the temple , rendering sacred service night and day with fasting and supplications . ”
Yes , Anna found comfort as well as joy in worshipping Jehovah .
Give an example of how true friends can bring comfort even when close relatives fail to do so .
When we associate closely with our brothers and sisters , we find true friends and close companions .
Paula recalls how sad she felt at the age of five when her mother fell away from the truth .
Overcoming this trial was not easy .
But she was greatly encouraged when Ann , a pioneer sister in the congregation , took a keen personal interest in her spiritual welfare .
“ Even though Ann was not related to me , I found her loving concern to be such a help , ” Paula explains .
“ It helped me to keep serving Jehovah . ” Paula continues to serve faithfully .
She is also very happy to be once again serving alongside her mother in the congregation .
Ann too is happy , for she has been like a spiritual mother to Paula .
Those who give comfort can experience what blessings ?
Interestingly , when we show loving personal interest in others , we may actually let go of some of our own negative feelings .
Sisters , married or unmarried , know for a fact that they find great joy in sharing the good news as fellow workers with God .
Their goal is to honor God by doing his will .
Some even view their participation in the ministry as therapy .
Certainly , all of us contribute to a close bond in the congregation when we show concern for others , those in our territory and those in the congregation .
The apostle Paul was a fine example .
He became like “ a nursing mother ” to those in the Thessalonian congregation ; he was also like a spiritual father . ​ — Read 1 Thessalonians 2 : 7 , 11 , 12 .
Who are primarily responsible for teaching young ones the truth ?
One area that merits attention is the comfort and help we offer to families .
On occasion , new ones ask mature publishers to help them teach their children the truth , even to conduct a Bible study with the youngsters .
Scripturally , the primary responsibility to teach and train young ones lies with the parents .
In some cases help from others is needed and much appreciated .
Yet , that does not negate the parents ’ responsibility .
Their regular communication in the family is essential .
In helping children , what should be borne in mind ?
If a parent decides to have someone study with the children , the one who does so should not try to take over the role of the parents .
There have been instances when a Witness was asked to study with children whose parents were not interested in the truth .
The Witness needs to bear in mind , though , that in providing spiritual help , he or she does not become the children’s parent .
And if such a study is conducted , it would be wise to do so either in the children’s home with the parents or another mature Witness around or in a suitable public area .
Thus no one would have a basis to misconstrue what is occurring .
It is to be hoped that the parents will , in time , fulfill their God - given responsibility to care spiritually for their children .
How can children become a source of comfort ?
Young ones who learn to love the true God and to follow his counsel can become a source of comfort in a family .
They can do so by showing respect for their parents and by helping in material ways .
They can also make a valuable spiritual contribution .
Before the Flood , Seth’s descendant Lamech worshipped Jehovah .
That family man said of his son Noah : “ [ He ] will bring us comfort from our labor and from the painful toil of our hands because of the ground that Jehovah has cursed . ”
That prophecy was fulfilled when the curse on the ground was lifted .
On a more personal level , children who pursue true worship can prove to be sources of comfort in their families , helping all to endure present trials and then to survive something greater than the Flood .
What can help us to endure courageously despite any tribulations or trials we face ?
Prayer , meditation on examples found in the Bible , and close association with Jehovah’s people are helping millions right now to gain comfort in all their trials .
( Read Psalm 145 : 18 , 19 . )
Knowing that Jehovah is the Source of lasting comfort will surely help us to endure courageously whatever tribulations we face ​ — now and in the future .
“ Where your treasure is , there your hearts will be also . ” ​ — LUKE 12 : 34 .
SONGS : 76 , 59
If we treasure God’s Kingdom in our heart , what will we be motivated to do ?
What are you determined to do to show your love for our lifesaving ministry ?
How do we fill our treasure store with revealed truths , and what are the benefits of doing so ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What are three spiritual treasures that Jehovah has given to us ?
( b ) What will we consider in this article ?
JEHOVAH is the wealthiest Person in the universe .
As a generous Father , he openhandedly shares his spiritual riches with all who discern their excelling value .
How grateful we are that Jehovah has given us spiritual treasures , which include ( 1 ) God’s Kingdom , ( 2 ) our lifesaving ministry , and ( 3 ) the precious truths found in his Word !
If we are not careful , though , we could lose appreciation for these treasures and , in effect , throw them away .
To hold on to them , we must use them well and constantly renew our love for them .
Jesus said : “ Where your treasure is , there your hearts will be also . ” ​ — Luke 12 : 34 .
Let us consider how we can develop and maintain our love and appreciation for the Kingdom , the ministry , and the truth .
As we do so , meditate on how you personally can deepen your love for these spiritual treasures .
What was the merchant in Jesus ’ illustration willing to do to gain the priceless pearl ?
( See opening picture . )
Read Matthew 13 : 45 , 46 .
Jesus told an illustration about a merchant who was seeking pearls .
Over the years , the merchant had no doubt bought and sold hundreds of pearls .
Yet , now he had found the one pearl that was so magnificent that just seeing it made his heart rejoice .
But to buy it would mean that he would have to sell everything else that he owned .
Can you imagine how precious that pearl was to him ?

If we love God’s Kingdom as much as the merchant loved the pearl , what will we do ?
What is the lesson for us ?
The truth of God’s Kingdom is like that priceless pearl .
If we love it as much as the merchant loved that pearl , we will be willing to give up everything in order to become and to remain one of the subjects of the Kingdom .
( Read Mark 10 : 28 - 30 . )
Consider two individuals who did just that .
How did Zacchaeus show his determination to gain God’s Kingdom ?
Zacchaeus was a chief tax collector who had become rich by extorting money .
Yet , when that unrighteous man heard Jesus preach about the Kingdom , he recognized the excelling value of what he was hearing and took immediate action .
He exclaimed : “ Look !

The half of my belongings , Lord , I am giving to the poor , and whatever I extorted from anyone , I am restoring four times over . ”
He gladly gave up his ill - gotten riches and abandoned his greed for material things .
What changes did Rose make to become a subject of God’s Kingdom , and why did she do so ?
Some years ago , when someone we will call Rose heard the Kingdom message , she was involved in a lesbian relationship .
She was president of an organization fighting for the rights of homosexuals .
As Rose studied the Bible , however , she discerned the excelling value of the truth about God’s Kingdom . But she realized that she would have to make major adjustments .
Her heart moved her to resign from her position and to end her lesbian relationship .
Rose was baptized in 2009 , and the next year , she began to serve as a regular pioneer .
Her love for Jehovah and his Kingdom was stronger than any fleshly desires . ​ — Mark 12 : 29 , 30 .
How can we maintain wholehearted love for God’s Kingdom ?
Granted , many of us have made life - transforming changes to become subjects of God’s Kingdom .
Even so , our work is not finished .
We must remain alert to things that actively compete for our affection , including the desire for material things and any immoral sexual desires .
To help us maintain our wholehearted love for God’s Kingdom , Jehovah has given us another priceless treasure .
( a ) Why did the apostle Paul describe our ministry as a “ treasure in earthen vessels ” ?
( b ) How did Paul demonstrate that he treasured his ministry ?
Recall that Jesus has assigned us to preach and teach the good news of God’s Kingdom .
The apostle Paul recognized the high value of the ministry .
He described the ministry of the new covenant as a “ treasure in earthen vessels . ”
Although we are simply imperfect earthen vessels , the message we preach can bring everlasting life to us and to those who listen to us .
Knowing this , Paul said : “ I do all things for the sake of the good news , in order to share it with others . ”
Yes , Paul’s love for the ministry moved him to work hard at making disciples .
( Read Romans 1 : 14 , 15 ; 2 Timothy 4 : 2 . )
That helped him to endure severe opposition .
How can we demonstrate such love for the ministry ?
What are some ways that we can demonstrate our appreciation for the ministry ?
One way that Paul demonstrated appreciation for the ministry was by being alert to opportunities to speak to others .
Like the apostles and early Christians , we preach informally , publicly , and from house to house .
As our circumstances allow , we look for ways to expand our ministry , perhaps by serving as an auxiliary or a regular pioneer .
We might also learn another language , move to another area in our own country , or even move to another land . ​ — Acts 16 : 9 , 10 .
How was Irene blessed for her determination to share the good news ?
Consider the example of Irene , a single sister in the United States .
She had a deep desire to preach to Russian - speaking immigrants .
When she began doing so in 1993 , there were only about 20 publishers in the Russian - language group in New York City .
For some 20 years , Irene has worked hard in that language field .
“ I still do not speak Russian perfectly , ” Irene admits .
Yet , Jehovah has blessed her zealous spirit and that of others like her .
Today , there are six Russian congregations in New York City .
Fifteen of those with whom Irene studied got baptized .
Some of them serve as Bethelites , pioneers , and elders .
Irene says , “ When I think of other goals I could have pursued , I can’t imagine one that would have brought me more joy . ”
Yes , she treasures her ministry !
Do you view your ministry as a treasure and manifest that in your weekly schedule ?
( See paragraphs 11 , 12 )
What positive results come from continuing to preach despite persecution ?
If we treasure our ministry , we will be like the apostle Paul , continuing to preach despite persecution .
During the 1930 ’ s and early 1940 ’ s , our brothers in the United States faced tremendous opposition .
Yet , like Paul , they stood firm and continued preaching .
To protect our right to do that , the brothers fought many legal battles .
In 1943 , Brother Nathan H .
Knorr , when commenting on one victory in the U.S .
Supreme Court , stated : “ The victories won are due to your fight .
If the publisher had not kept on in the field , there would not be any cases in the Supreme Court ; but it is because you , the publisher , the brothers all over the world , keep on and will not quit that the defeat of persecution is brought about .
It is this victory of the Lord’s people standing firm that finally brings that decision . ”
This same firm stand by brothers in other countries has led to similar victories .
Yes , our love for the ministry can defeat persecution .
What is your determination with regard to your ministry ?
When we view the ministry as a priceless treasure from Jehovah , we will never be content with simply “ counting time . ”
Rather , we will do everything in our power “ to bear thorough witness to the good news . ”

But what will we teach to others ?
Consider another treasure from God .
13 , 14 .
What is the “ treasure store ” that Jesus referred to at Matthew 13 : 52 , and how do we fill it ?
A third spiritual treasure is our repository of revealed truths .

Jehovah is the God of truth .
As a generous Father , he shares divine truths with those who fear him .
From the time that we first heard the truth , we have had the opportunity to collect truths from his Word , the Bible , from our Christian publications , and from our conventions , assemblies , and weekly meetings .
Over time , we develop what Jesus described as a “ treasure store ” of old and new truths .
( Read Matthew 13 : 52 . )
Jehovah will help us to collect precious new truths into our “ treasure store ” if we search for them as for hidden treasures .
( Read Proverbs 2 : 4 - 7 . )
How do we do that ?
We must develop good personal study habits and do careful research in God’s Word and in our publications .
This will help us to discover truths that may be “ new ” in the sense that we did not know them before .
The very first issue of this magazine , published in July 1879 , stated : “ Truth , like a modest little flower in the wilderness of life , is surrounded and almost choked by the luxuriant growth of the weeds of error .
If you would find it you must be ever on the lookout . . . .
If you would possess it you must stoop to get it .
Be not content with one flower of truth . . . .
Gather ever , seek for more . ”
Yes , we must be eager to enrich our own treasure store of divine truths .
Why might we refer to some truths as “ old , ” and what are some that you especially treasure ?
We discovered some priceless truths when we first began to associate with God’s people .
These could well be described as “ old , ” in that we have known and appreciated them from the beginning of our Christian course .
What do such precious truths include ?
We learned that Jehovah is our Creator and Life - Giver and that he has a purpose for mankind .
We also learned that God lovingly provided the ransom sacrifice of his Son so that we might be freed from sin and death .
We further learned that his Kingdom will end all suffering and that we have the prospect of living forever in peace and happiness under Kingdom rule . ​ — John 3 : 16 ; Rev .
4 : 11 ; 21 : 3 , 4 .
What do we need to do when we receive an adjusted understanding of a truth ?
From time to time , our understanding of a Bible prophecy or some Scriptural passage may be adjusted .
When such new understandings are provided , we ought to take time to study the information carefully and meditate on it .
We seek to understand clearly not only the major adjustments but also the subtle differences between the old understanding and the new one .
In this way , we are certain to place the new truth securely in our own treasure store .
Why are such efforts worthwhile ?
17 , 18 .
How can holy spirit help us ?
Jesus taught that God’s spirit can bring back to our mind things that we have learned .
How can this help us as public instructors of the good news ?
Consider the experience of a brother named Peter .
In 1970 he was 19 years old and had recently begun serving at Bethel in Britain .
While preaching from door to door , he met a bearded middle - aged man .
Peter asked the man if he would like to understand the Bible .
Somewhat shocked , the man responded that this was a house of Jewish rabbis .
To test Peter , the rabbi asked , “ So , my boy , what language was the book of Daniel written in ? ”
Peter replied , “ Part of it was written in Aramaic . ”
“ The rabbi , ” Peter recalls , “ was surprised that I knew the answer ​ — but not as surprised as I was ! How did I know the answer ?
When I went home and checked the Watchtower and Awake ! magazines from the previous months , I found an article explaining that Daniel was written in Aramaic . ”
Yes , the holy spirit can bring back to our mind thoughts we previously read and securely placed in our treasure store . ​ — Luke 12 : 11 , 12 ; 21 : 13 - 15 .
If we treasure the wisdom from Jehovah , our heart will motivate us to fill up our treasure store with truths ​ — both new and old .
As our love and appreciation for Jehovah’s wisdom continue to grow , we will be well - equipped as public instructors .
Why must we safeguard our spiritual treasures ?
Satan and his world are constantly seeking to weaken or destroy our appreciation for the spiritual treasures we have discussed in this article .
We are not immune to these tactics .
We could easily be enticed by promises of a lucrative career , dreams of a lavish lifestyle , or the desire for a showy display of material riches .
The apostle John reminds us that this world is passing away and so is its desire .
Therefore , we must work hard to safeguard our affections and protect our love and appreciation for spiritual riches .
What are you resolved to do to safeguard your spiritual riches ?
Be willing to give up anything that could replace your wholehearted love for God’s Kingdom .
Continue to preach zealously , never losing appreciation for our lifesaving ministry .
Earnestly continue to search for divine truths .
As you do this , you will build up “ treasure in the heavens , where no thief gets near and no moth consumes .
For where your treasure is , there your hearts will be also . ” ​ — Luke 12 : 33 , 34 .
JEHOVAH GOD urges Christians to cherish peace , to make peace a key aspect of life .
The result of our being peaceable is that true worshippers enjoy an abundance of peace .

This helps to make the Christian congregation attractive to others who wish to be free of conflict .
For instance , a prominent witch doctor in Madagascar observed the harmony enjoyed by Jehovah’s Witnesses .
He said to himself , ‘ If ever I wanted to follow a religion , this would be the one . ’
In time , he quit his spiritistic practices , spent months straightening out his unscriptural marital situation , and became a worshipper of Jehovah , the God of peace .
Like that man , thousands of people every year find in the Christian congregation the peace that they so desperately desire .
However , the Bible makes it clear that the presence of “ bitter jealousy and contentiousness ” in the congregation can destroy friendships and create trouble .
Happily , the Bible also provides us with positive advice on how we can avoid those problems and strengthen peace .
To set the stage for doing so , let us consider some real - life situations .
“ I had trouble getting along with a brother who worked with me .
Once when we were yelling at each other , two people came in and witnessed our blowup . ” ​ — CHRIS .
“ A sister with whom I often preached suddenly ended our arrangements for the ministry .
Then she stopped talking to me altogether .
I had no idea why . ” ​ — JANET .
“ I was on a three - person phone call .
One of the others said good - bye , and I thought he was off the line .
I then said unkind things about him to the other person on the phone , but the first person had not hung up . ” ​ — MICHAEL .
“ In our congregation , two pioneers began having problems .
One took to scolding the other .
Their bickering was discouraging to others . ” ​ — GARY .
You might feel that those incidents appear minor .
Still , each had the potential for causing lasting emotional and spiritual injury to those involved .
You will be pleased to know , though , that peace was restored by those brothers and sisters , who all used the Bible as their guide .
What Bible guidelines do you think they applied successfully ?
“ Do not become upset with one another on the way . ”
Joseph gave that advice to his brothers who were returning to their father .
How wise his words were !
When a person does not control his feelings and gets upset easily , he may provoke others to anger .
Chris came to see that his weaknesses were pride and a reluctance to accept direction .
Wanting to change , he apologized to the brother with whom he had been arguing and then worked hard to control his temper .
Noting Chris ’ effort to change , the workmate also made adjustments .
Now they enjoy serving Jehovah together .
“ Plans fail when there is no consultation . ”
Janet concluded that she needed to take that truth more to heart .
She decided to ‘ consult , ’ or speak with , the other sister .
During their conversation , Janet tactfully invited the sister to open up regarding her resentment .

At first , the conversation was somewhat tense , but things improved as they discussed their problem in a calm way .
The sister discovered that she had misunderstood a matter that did not even involve Janet .
She apologized , and they are once again serving Jehovah as a team .
“ If , then , you are bringing your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you , leave your gift there in front of the altar , and go away . First make your peace with your brother . ”
You may recall that advice Jesus gave in the Sermon on the Mount .
Michael felt devastated when he realized how inconsiderate and unkind he had been .
He was determined to make an effort to restore peace . He humbly apologized face - to - face to the brother he had hurt .
With what result ?
Michael says , “ My brother genuinely forgave me . ”
Their friendship was restored .
“ Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another . ”

In the case of the two longtime pioneers , a kind elder helped them to reflect on such questions as these : ‘ Do the two of us have the right to make others sad because of our disagreement ?
Do we truly have a valid reason not to put up with each other and go on serving Jehovah peacefully ? ’
They accepted the elder’s counsel and applied it .
Now they get along well as they preach the good news .
Applying the Bible instruction just cited , Colossians 3 : 12 - 14 , may be a good starting point if someone hurts you .
Many have found that , with humility , they can just forgive and forget .
If after some effort it seems that more is needed , could Matthew 18 : 15 be applied in principle ?
Jesus ’ counsel here refers to the step to take when someone has committed a serious sin against another . But in principle it may be the course you need to follow .
Simply approach your brother or sister and kindly and humbly try to discuss the matter and settle it .
Of course , the Bible provides other practical suggestions .
Underlying many of them is your displaying “ the fruitage of the spirit . . . love , joy , peace , patience , kindness , goodness , faith , mildness , self - control . ”
Like oil that lubricates a machine , those godly qualities allow for a smooth peacemaking process .
Personality ​ — the unique set of traits that each of us has and that varies from one person to another — ​ can make for rich friendships .
Differences in personality can also lead to conflicts .
An experienced elder gives this example : “ Someone who is shy can have a difficult time being around an outgoing , backslapping person .
That difference may seem unimportant ; yet , it can lead to serious problems . ”
Do you feel , however , that people who have distinctly different personalities are bound to have problems ?
Well , consider two of the apostles . What was Peter like ?
You may think of him as outspoken and impulsive . What of John ?
We may think of him as loving and usually measured in his speech and actions .
There may be some basis for such ideas about those two apostles .
It seems that they differed in personality .
Still , they worked well together .
Accordingly , it is possible for Christians with quite different personalities to work together today .
Perhaps there is in your congregation a brother whose speech and actions irritate you .
Still , you realize that Christ died for that person and you are to show love .
So rather than write off any friendship with that one or tend to avoid him , ask yourself : ‘ Is my brother doing something that is clearly wrong Scripturally ?
Is he maliciously trying to cause me discomfort ?
Or do we just have different personalities ? ’
Also , of great importance is the question : ‘ Which of his good qualities can I benefit from ? ’
That last question is key .
If the person is a talker and you are quiet , think of the ease with which he starts conversations in the ministry .
You might offer to work with the person in the ministry and see what you can learn .
If he has often shown generosity to others , whereas you tend to be a bit tightfisted , why not note the joy that comes from giving to the elderly , the sick , or the needy ?
The point is , even though you have different personalities , you and your brother may be able to draw closer by focusing on the positive .
Your doing so may not turn you into close companions , but it can help to draw you together and increase peace ​ — in you and in the congregation as a whole .
Euodia and Syntyche may have had distinctly different ways or personalities .
Yet , the apostle Paul encouraged them “ to be of the same mind in the Lord . ”
Will you similarly work toward that goal and the related goal of peace ?
Like weeds growing wild in a flower garden , bad feelings toward others will likely get worse unless we strive to uproot them .
Once bitterness overpowers a person’s heart , it can even impact the spirit of the congregation .
If we love Jehovah and our brothers , we will do all we can to keep personal differences from disturbing or diminishing the peace of God’s people .

If you humble yourself and strive to make peace , you may obtain excellent results
When we address conflicts or differences with the goal of making peace , we may be surprised at the excellent results .
Consider the experience of one Witness : “ I felt that one sister was treating me as if I were a child .
It really bothered me .
As my irritation grew , I started being curt with her .
I thought , ‘ She does not show me the respect I deserve , so I am not going to show her respect . ’ ”
This Witness then began to think about her own actions .
“ I began seeing my own personality flaws , and I was very disappointed in myself .
I realized that I had to adjust my thinking .
After praying to Jehovah about the matter , I bought the sister a small gift and wrote her a card to apologize for my bad attitude .
We hugged each other and agreed to put the matter behind us .
We have not had any more problems . ”
People desperately need peace .
However , when they face threats to their position and pride , many start acting in a way that is not peaceable .
That is true of many who do not worship Jehovah , but among his name worshippers , peace and unity should prevail .
He inspired Paul to write : “ I . . . appeal to you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called , with all humility and mildness , with patience , putting up with one another in love , earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace . ”

That “ uniting bond of peace ” is priceless .
Let us strengthen it and be determined to resolve any differences that may surface among us .
To say that the man had intense emotions is an understatement .
Before he became a Christian , Paul was “ breathing threat and murder against the disciples of the Lord . ”
In time , he described his former feelings toward Christ’s followers : “ I was extremely furious with them . ” ​ — Acts 26 : 11 .
Paul made major changes after his baptism , but notoriety followed him .
Some time after he became a Christian , the brothers in Jerusalem “ were all afraid of him , because they did not believe he was a disciple . ” ​ — Acts 9 : 26 .

The congregation might have continued to be wary of Paul were it not for a Christian from Cyprus named Joseph .
His loving manner was well - known , and the brothers gave him the descriptive name “ Barnabas ” ​ — “ Son of Comfort . ”
Those taking the lead respected him , and he helped Paul .
We read : “ Barnabas came to his aid and led him to the apostles , and he told them in detail how on the road he had seen the Lord , . . . and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus . ”
On hearing Barnabas ’ testimony , the Jerusalem congregation accepted Paul .
Soon , those two men began serving together as missionaries . ​ — Acts 13 : 2 , 3 .
Barnabas must have seen good in Paul’s intense drive and direct approach . On the other hand , Paul certainly would have appreciated Barnabas ’ kindness and compassion .
The Bible does mention that at one point they had “ a sharp burst of anger . ”
Why ?
The account does not suggest that it was the result of a personality conflict .
Rather , it reflected their differing opinions of John Mark’s qualifications for missionary service . ​ — Acts 15 : 36 - 40 .
Despite the different personalities of Paul and Barnabas , they had been able to serve together before that event .
And we read that Paul and Mark later worked together again .
Thus , different personalities need not produce conflict ​ — not then , not today .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
Greek families in the Athens area practice Kingdom songs during a Christian gathering
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
THE above words were spoken by David of ancient Israel in praise of a woman whom he encountered .
Her name was Abigail .
What prompted David to praise her , and how can we benefit from her example ?
David met this married woman at a time when he was fleeing from King Saul .
Abigail was married to Nabal , a wealthy man who pastured his large flocks in the mountainous region of southern Judah .
David and his men had been “ like a protective wall ” for Nabal’s shepherds and flocks .
David later sent messengers to Nabal , asking for ‘ whatever he could spare ’ in the way of food supplies .
That was hardly an unreasonable request , considering how David and his men had protected Nabal’s interests .
But Nabal , whose name means “ Senseless ” or “ Stupid , ” lived up to his name .
He replied in a harsh and insulting way , denying David’s request .
So David prepared to punish Nabal for his offensive and unreasonable response .
Nabal and his household would pay for his stupidity . ​ — 1 Sam .
25 : 2 - 13 , 21 , 22 .
Discerning the grave consequences of the hasty action being planned , Abigail courageously intervened .
She respectfully appealed to David on the basis of his relationship with Jehovah .
And she provided ample food supplies to David , who would be the next king , and to his men .
David , in turn , acknowledged that Jehovah had used her to restrain him from doing what would have made him guilty before God .
David said to Abigail : “ Blessed be your good sense ! May you be blessed for restraining me this day from incurring bloodguilt . ” ​ — 1 Sam .
25 : 18 , 19 , 23 - 35 .
We can easily see that we would never want to be like Nabal , unappreciative of good things done for us .
In addition , when we see a bad situation developing , we do well to do what we can to defuse it .
Yes , we can echo the sentiment of the psalmist who told God : “ Teach me good sense and knowledge . ” ​ — Ps .
119 : 66 .
Others may note the wisdom , or good sense , in our actions .
Whether they verbalize it or not , they may feel like David , who said : “ Blessed be your good sense ! ”
“ May people know that you , whose name is Jehovah , you alone are the Most High over all the earth . ” ​ — PS .
83 : 18 .
SONGS : 9 , 22
Why is the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty an important issue facing mankind ?
How did Job’s integrity under trial support Jehovah’s sovereignty ; yet , in what way did Job fall short ?
What are some important ways that we show support for Jehovah’s sovereignty ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What big issue faces all mankind ?
( b ) How important is appreciation for that issue ?
FOR many people today , money is the big issue .
They are focused on accumulating wealth or on holding on to what they have .
Others consider their big issue to be family , health , or personal accomplishments .
However , a very big issue facing all of us is the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty . We need to guard against losing sight of this vital issue . How could that happen ?
We could become so absorbed in the demands of our day - to - day life that we forget just how important the vindication of God’s sovereignty really is .
Or we could allow the weight of our personal trials to eclipse that great issue .
On the other hand , the keener our appreciation for the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty , the better equipped we are to meet challenges in our daily lives .
And such appreciation will draw us closer to Jehovah .
What are Satan’s claims with regard to God’s rulership ?
The action of Satan the Devil has raised the question of the rightfulness of Jehovah’s sovereignty .
He contends that God’s rulership is corrupt and that Jehovah withholds the best from his creatures .
According to the Devil , humans would be far happier and better off ruling themselves .
Satan has also implied that no human at heart is loyal to God ​ — that under sufficient pressure , anyone will reject Jehovah’s rulership .
In connection with the Devil’s challenge , Jehovah is allowing time for human experience to reveal the unsavory truth about life outside of God’s righteous rule .
Why must the issue of sovereignty be settled ?
Of course , Jehovah knows that the Devil’s allegations are false .
So why has God chosen to allow the issue to go on , giving Satan time to try to prove his point ?
The answer involves all intelligent creatures .
( Read Psalm 83 : 18 . )
After all , the first human couple rejected Jehovah’s rulership , and so have many others since then .
This could lead some to wonder whether there might be validity to the Devil’s claim .
As long as the question remains unsettled in the minds of humans or angels , discord among nations , races , tribes , families , and individuals will exist .
But after Jehovah’s sovereignty is vindicated , all will submit everlastingly to his righteous rule .
Universal peace will be restored . ​ — Eph .
1 : 9 , 10 .
What is our role in supporting Jehovah’s side of the issue of sovereignty ?
The rightfulness of God’s sovereignty will be vindicated and rule by Satan and humans will utterly fail and be removed .
Rule by God through his Messianic Kingdom will succeed , and integrity - keepers will have proved that humans can take their stand for God’s rulership .
Do you want to be among those who go on record as integrity - keeping supporters of Jehovah’s sovereignty ?
No doubt you do .

To be integrity - keepers , we need to fix our eyes on that big issue and comprehend how important it really is .
How important is the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty ?
As stated , the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty is a vital issue involving mankind .
It is more important than the personal happiness of any individual .
Does that fact undermine the value of our salvation or imply that Jehovah does not really care for us ?
Not at all .
Why not ?
7 , 8 .
Why does the vindication of God’s sovereignty include the fulfillment of his promises ?
Jehovah deeply loves and values mankind . He was willing to use the blood of his Son to make possible our eternal salvation .
Were Jehovah to fail to fulfill his promises , the Devil would have an excuse to call God a liar who withholds good and thus rules in an unfair way .
It would also vindicate opposers who mockingly ask : “ Where is this promised presence of his ?
Why , from the day our forefathers fell asleep in death , all things are continuing exactly as they were from creation’s beginning . ”
Hence , Jehovah will see to it that the vindication of his sovereignty includes the salvation of obedient humans !
( Read Isaiah 55 : 10 , 11 . )
Furthermore , Jehovah’s love characterizes his sovereignty .
So we can be sure that he will always love , value , and appreciate his loyal servants . ​ — Ex .
34 : 6 .
In acknowledging the importance of Jehovah’s sovereignty , we are not belittling our salvation or our worth in his eyes .
We are merely keeping sovereignty and salvation in proper perspective .
That correct perspective is important if we are to keep our eyes on this big issue and take our stand for Jehovah’s righteous rule .
What was Satan’s claim with regard to Job ?
( See opening picture . )
The need for proper perspective is made quite clear in the book of Job , one of the earliest Bible books to be written .
There we learn of Satan’s contention that if subjected to intense suffering , Job would reject God .
Satan suggested that God personally afflict Job .
Jehovah did not do that , but he allowed Satan to test Job , stating : “ Everything that he has is in your hand . ”
( Read Job 1 : 7 - 12 . )
In a short time , Job lost his servants , his means of livelihood , and his ten beloved children .
Satan accomplished this in a way that made it appear as if God himself had been the cause of Job’s troubles .
Satan next afflicted Job with a painful and repulsive illness .
His despair was deepened further by the disheartening words of his wife and of three companions who acted as if they were his friends . ​ — Job 2 : 9 ; 3 : 11 ; 16 : 2 .
( a ) What did Job do that showed his integrity to God ?
( b ) In what way did he fall short ? The result ?
Satan’s claim was shown to be completely false .
Job refused to turn his back on God . However , Job temporarily lost the proper perspective .
He became absorbed in establishing his own righteousness , even demanding a reason for his suffering .
We might think that would be understandable in the light of all that he had suffered .
Yet , God saw the need to correct Job’s thinking .
What did Jehovah tell him ?
11 , 12 .
What did Jehovah help Job to appreciate , and how did Job respond ?
God’s words to Job fill four chapters in the book of Job ​ — chapters 38 through 41 .
Nowhere do we read of God’s telling Job specifically the reason behind his suffering .
The main point of Jehovah’s words was not to explain to Job why he was suffering , as if God had to justify himself .
Rather , Jehovah wanted to help Job recognize his insignificance in comparison with God’s greatness . And he helped Job to see that there were greater issues with which to be concerned .
( Read Job 38 : 18 - 21 . )
This helped Job regain the proper perspective .
Was Jehovah harsh in giving such straightforward counsel after Job had endured so severe a trial ?
God was not , and Job did not think so .
Despite his ordeal , Job finally began to speak appreciatively .
He even stated : “ I take back what I said , and I repent in dust and ashes . ”
Such was the effect of Jehovah’s pointed but refreshing counsel .
Earlier , Job had also received corrective counsel from young Elihu .
After Job responded to God’s reproof and corrected his view , Jehovah expressed to others his approval of Job’s faithfulness under trial . ​ — Job 42 : 7 , 8 .
How would Jehovah’s counsel benefit Job long after his trials ?
Jehovah’s counsel would continue to benefit Job even after his trials were over .
How so ?
Well , though “ Jehovah blessed the last part of Job’s life more than the beginning , ” restoration and recovery must have taken time .
He later “ came to have seven more sons and three more daughters . ”
Surely Job missed his children who died earlier at Satan’s hand .
For some time , he likely experienced vivid memories of his suffering .
Even if he eventually better understood the reason for his trials , he may on occasion have thought about why it was necessary for him to suffer to such an extent .
Whatever his thoughts , he could reflect on God’s counsel .
Doing so would help him maintain the proper perspective and , in turn , provide comfort . ​ — Ps . 94 : 19 , ftn .
Can we look past our own problems and see the real issue ?
( See paragraph 14 )
What can we learn from Job’s experience ?
We too can acquire proper perspective and gain comfort from the account of Job .
After all , Jehovah had it preserved “ for our instruction , so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope . ”
What is the lesson for us ?
Primarily this : Let us not become so absorbed in our own lives that we lose sight of this big issue ​ — the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty .
And let us appreciate that our role in this vital issue entails remaining faithful even under difficult circumstances , as did Job .
What does our faithfulness under trial accomplish ?
Why is it comforting to reflect on the value of our faithfulness ? Because it means that our trials serve a purpose .
Far from indicating Jehovah’s displeasure , they provide for us a means to show that we support God’s sovereignty .
Our endurance produces “ an approved condition ” and strengthens our hope .
( Read Romans 5 : 3 - 5 . )
The record of Job bears out that “ Jehovah is very tender in affection and merciful . ”
So we can be sure that he will reward us and all who uphold his sovereignty .
Knowing this helps us “ endure fully with patience and joy . ” ​ — Col .
1 : 11 .
Why must we remind ourselves of the importance of the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty ?
Granted , keeping our eyes on the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty can be challenging . Our problems may seem to overwhelm us at times .
Even relatively minor ones can loom large in our mind if we dwell on them .
Therefore , we do well to remind ourselves regularly of the importance of supporting God’s sovereignty when we face difficult circumstances .
How can having a regular share in Jehovah’s work help us remain focused on the big issue ?
Continuing to have a regular share in Jehovah’s work can help us to stay focused on the big issue .
For example , a Witness named Renee suffered a stroke and struggled with chronic pain and cancer .
While being treated at medical facilities , she witnessed to hospital staff , patients , and visitors .
At one facility , she spent 80 hours witnessing in just two and a half weeks .
Even as she approached death , Renee never lost sight of Jehovah’s sovereignty .
That , in turn , mitigated some of her distress .
How did one sister’s experience illustrate the benefit of upholding Jehovah’s sovereignty ?
Of course , we want to stay focused on Jehovah’s sovereignty also in the face of day - to - day pressures and inconveniences .
Jennifer spent three days at an airport waiting for a flight home . One flight after another got canceled .
Feeling alone and exhausted , she could easily have surrendered to self - pity .
Instead , she prayed to see how she might be of spiritual help to others experiencing similar frustration . With what result ? She witnessed to many people and placed much literature .
She says , “ I felt that Jehovah blessed me despite the trying experience and gave me enough strength to carry his name in a worthwhile way . ”
Indeed , she stayed focused on Jehovah’s purpose .
Where do Jehovah’s people stand regarding his sovereignty ?
Appreciation for Jehovah’s sovereignty has distinguished true religion from false .
God’s people have long upheld his sovereignty .
As supporters of true worship , we individually should endeavor to maintain that same Scriptural perspective .
How does Jehovah feel about your efforts to uphold his sovereignty ?
Be assured that Jehovah treasures your efforts to uphold his sovereignty by your faithful service and endurance of trials .
The next article will consider further why Jehovah’s sovereignty is deserving of your wholehearted support and how you can uphold it .

“ You are worthy , Jehovah our God , to receive the glory and the honor and the power , because you created all things . ” ​ — REV .
4 : 11 .
SONGS : 12 , 150
Why is Jehovah the rightful Sovereign of the universe ?
Why is Jehovah’s rulership the best possible ?
How can we uphold Jehovah’s sovereignty now ?
1 , 2 .
Of what must each of us be convinced ?
( See opening picture . )
AS DISCUSSED in the preceding article , the Devil contends that Jehovah exercises his sovereignty in an unworthy way and that mankind would be better off ruling themselves .
Is Satan right ?
Suppose that humans who chose self - rule could live forever .
Would they be better off without God’s rulership ?
Would you be happier if you had absolute independence and everlasting life ?
No one can answer those questions for you .
Each person should think the matter through . In doing so , it should become evident that God’s sovereignty is right . It is the best rulership . And it deserves our wholehearted support .
The Bible provides a basis for such conviction . Consider , for example , what the Scriptures tell us about the rightfulness of Jehovah’s sovereignty .
Why is Jehovah the only rightful Sovereign ?
Jehovah is the rightful Sovereign of the universe because he is the almighty God and Creator .
At Revelation 4 : 11 , Christ’s 144,000 heavenly corulers are depicted in a vision , saying : “ You are worthy , Jehovah our God , to receive the glory and the honor and the power , because you created all things , and because of your will they came into existence and were created . ”
Yes , because Jehovah created all things , he has full right to rule over humans as well as spirit creatures .
Why is opposing God’s sovereignty a misuse of free will ?
Satan has created nothing .
Consequently , he has no rightful claim to universal rulership .
In rebelling against Jehovah’s sovereignty , he and the first human couple acted arrogantly .
True , as creatures with free will , they could choose independence from God .
But did that give them the right to do so ?
No .
Free will enables people to make many appropriate choices daily .
However , it does not entitle them to rebel against their Creator and Life - Giver .
Clearly , taking a stand against Jehovah is a misuse of free will .
As humans , our place is under Jehovah’s righteous rule .
Why can we be sure that God’s decisions are just ?
Jehovah is the rightful Sovereign for yet another reason . He exercises his authority with perfect justice .
He declares : “ I am Jehovah , the One showing loyal love , justice , and righteousness in the earth , for in these things I take delight . ”
He does not look to any written code of laws made by imperfect men as a basis for determining what is just and fair .
His perfect sense of justice emanates from his own being , and on that basis , he provided written laws for humans .
“ Righteousness and justice are the foundation of [ his ] throne , ” so we can be confident that all of his laws , principles , and decisions are righteous .
In contrast , despite his allegation that Jehovah’s sovereignty is deficient , Satan has been unable to produce a world wherein justice always prevails .
What is one reason why Jehovah has the right to govern the world ?
Moreover , Jehovah is the rightful Sovereign because he has the knowledge and wisdom needed to care for the universe .
Consider , for example , the fact that God enabled his Son to heal diseases that doctors could not cure .
From Jehovah’s standpoint , this was no miracle .
He understands the processes involved and has the ability to undo any damage .
The same is true with regard to his ability to raise the dead and prevent natural disasters .
How is Jehovah’s wisdom far superior to that of the world under Satan’s dominion ?

The world under Satan’s influence is still searching for a way to settle national and international disputes .
Jehovah alone has the wisdom to bring about world peace .
As we learn of Jehovah’s knowledge and wisdom , we feel as did the apostle Paul , who wrote under inspiration : “ O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge !
How unsearchable his judgments are and beyond tracing out his ways are ! ” ​ — Rom .
11 : 33 .
What touches your heart about Jehovah’s way of ruling ?
The Bible does more than establish Jehovah’s right to rule .
It shows why his sovereignty is superior to that of others .
One reason is that he rules with love . Indeed , our hearts are touched by how he chooses to exercise his sovereignty .
He is “ merciful and compassionate , slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth . ”
God treats his human servants with dignity and respect .
He cares for us better than we can care for ourselves .
Contrary to what the Devil claims , Jehovah does not hold back anything good from his faithful worshippers .
Why , he even gave his precious Son so that we could have the prospect of endless life ! ​ — Read Psalm 84 : 11 ; Romans 8 : 32 .
How do we know that God’s concern extends to individuals ?
Jehovah’s concern extends beyond the welfare of his people as a whole .
He also shows keen interest in each individual .
Consider , for example , the three centuries during which Jehovah was raising up and empowering judges to deliver the nation of Israel from their oppressors .
During that turbulent period , he did not fail to notice one non - Israelite named Ruth . At considerable sacrifice , she converted to true worship .
Jehovah blessed Ruth with a husband and a son .
But that is not all . When she is resurrected , Ruth will learn that her son was part of the line that led to the Messiah .
And imagine how moved she will be to discover that her life story was preserved in a Bible book bearing her name ! ​ — Ruth 4 : 13 ; Matt .
1 : 5 , 16 .
Why is Jehovah’s sovereignty not unduly restrictive ?
Jehovah’s way of ruling is neither oppressive nor rigid .
It allows for freedom and promotes joy .
David expressed it this way : “ In his [ God’s ] presence are majesty and splendor ; strength and joy are in his dwelling place . ”
Similarly , the psalmist Ethan wrote : “ Happy are the people who know the joyful shouting . O Jehovah , they walk in the light of your face .
They rejoice in your name all day long , and in your righteousness they are exalted . ” ​ — Ps .
89 : 15 , 16 .
How can we strengthen our conviction that Jehovah’s sovereignty is best ?
Frequent meditation on Jehovah’s goodness can strengthen our conviction that his rulership is best .
We come to feel as did the psalmist : “ A day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else ! ”
How could it be otherwise ?
As our loving Designer and Creator , Jehovah knows what we need in order to be truly happy , and he fills that need abundantly .
Whatever he requires of us is for our benefit and ultimately results in our greatest joy .
That is so even if his requirements involve our making some sacrifices . ​ — Read Isaiah 48 : 17 .
What is our primary motive for upholding Jehovah’s sovereignty ?
The Bible indicates that after the Thousand Year Reign of Christ , some people will choose to rebel against Jehovah’s sovereignty .
What might induce them to do such a thing ?
The Devil , released from imprisonment and intent on misleading mankind , will no doubt appeal to selfishness .
He has always done that .
He may attempt to convince people that there is a way to live forever without obeying Jehovah .
Of course , that could never be true .
But more to the point : Will such a false claim hold any appeal for us ?
If we love Jehovah and serve him because of his goodness and because of his being the rightful Sovereign of the universe , then such a devilish claim will be repulsive .
We will never desire life other than life under Jehovah’s rightful and loving sovereignty .
How does imitating God show support for him ?
Surely Jehovah’s sovereignty merits our wholehearted support .
As we have seen , he has the right to rule , and his way of ruling is the best .
We can uphold Jehovah’s sovereignty by maintaining our integrity and by serving God faithfully . How else can we show our support ?
We can do so by doing things Jehovah’s way . When we handle matters as Jehovah would , we show that we love and uphold his way of ruling . ​ — Read Ephesians 5 : 1 , 2 .
How can elders and family heads imitate Jehovah ?
We learn from our study of the Bible that Jehovah exercises authority in a loving manner .
In harmony with that , family heads and elders who love his sovereignty will not be demanding , as if exercising a small sovereignty of their own .
Instead , they will imitate Jehovah .
Paul was just such an imitator of God and his Son .
Paul did not embarrass others or pressure them into taking a desired course of action .
Rather , he appealed to them .
That is Jehovah’s way of handling matters .
Thus , that should be the way of all who love and uphold his way of ruling .
How does respect for theocratic headship reveal our love for Jehovah’s way of ruling ?
What is our response to divinely authorized headship ?
By our respectful cooperation , we show our support for Jehovah’s sovereignty .
Even if we do not fully understand or agree with a decision , we will still want to support theocratic order .
That is quite different from the way of the world , but it is the way of life under Jehovah’s rulership .
We benefit from doing so , for God has our interests at heart .
How do supporters of God’s sovereignty make personal decisions ?
We can also show our support of God’s sovereignty by our personal decisions .
It is not Jehovah’s way to provide a specific command for every situation .
Instead , in guiding us he reveals his thinking .
For example , he does not provide a detailed dress code for Christians .
Rather , he reveals his desire that we select styles of dress and grooming that show modesty and that befit Christian ministers .
He is also concerned that we do not stumble others or disturb them by our decisions .
When we guide our steps , not solely by preference , but primarily by Jehovah’s thinking and concerns , we show that we love and support his way of ruling .
Uphold God’s sovereignty in making decisions and in family activities ( See paragraphs 16 - 18 )
17 , 18 .
What are some ways in which married couples can show that they uphold Jehovah’s sovereignty ?
Consider an area wherein Christian married couples can support Jehovah’s ways and thereby uphold his sovereignty .
What if married life proves to be more challenging than expected ?
Suppose that it even seems disappointing .
Why not pause to reflect on Jehovah’s dealings with Israel .
He referred to himself as being like a husband to that ancient nation .
What a difficult “ marriage ” that proved to be !
Yet , Jehovah was not quick to give up on it .
He repeatedly showed mercy toward the nation and loyalty to his covenant with them .
( Read Psalm 106 : 43 - 45 . )
Are we not drawn to Jehovah by such loyal love ?
Accordingly , married couples who love Jehovah’s ways imitate him . They do not seek an unscriptural way out of a difficult marriage .
They realize that Jehovah has yoked them together and that he wants them to “ stick ” to each other .
The only Scriptural ground for divorce that might free one to remarry is sexual immorality .
By making the best of their situation and even seeking to improve it , they uphold Jehovah’s righteous way of ruling .
If we fall short of upholding God’s sovereignty , what should we do ?
Being imperfect , we will on occasion do things that disappoint Jehovah .
He knows this and has lovingly made provision for us by means of Christ’s ransom .
Thus , when we fall short in some respect , we should ask Jehovah for forgiveness .
Rather than continually berate ourselves , we should endeavor to learn from the mistake .
If we stay close to Jehovah , he will forgive us and help us to heal and to handle similar situations successfully in the future . ​ — Ps .
103 : 3 .
Why show support for Jehovah’s sovereignty now ?
In the new world , all will come under Jehovah’s sovereignty and learn his righteous ways .
We , however , receive much of that education now .
And the settling of the issue of sovereignty is well under way .
Now is the time to uphold God’s sovereignty by our integrity , our service , and our earnest endeavors to imitate him in all we do .
ACCORDING to the account of Matthew’s Gospel , “ Jesus entered the temple and threw out all those selling and buying in the temple , and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves .
And he said to them : ‘ It is written , “ My house will be called a house of prayer , ” but you are making it a cave of robbers . ’ ” ​ — Matt .
21 : 12 , 13 .
Jewish historical records show that temple merchants exploited their customers by charging exorbitant prices .
For example , the Mishnah ( Keritot 1 : 7 ) records an occasion in the first century C.E . when the price of a pair of sacrificial pigeons rose to a golden denar .
That was the equivalent of what an unskilled laborer might earn for 25 days ’ work .
Pigeons or doves were an acceptable sacrifice of the poor ; yet , the price even of these birds had become prohibitive .
Rabbi Simeon ben Gamaliel , outraged by this state of affairs , reduced the number of obligatory sacrifices , upon which the price of two pigeons immediately fell to a hundredth of the former price .

In light of the above , Jesus was justified in calling the temple merchants “ robbers ” on account of their exploitation and greed .
Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower ?
Well , see if you can answer the following questions :
When directions come from God’s organization , what attitude should brothers , such as circuit overseers and congregation elders , have ?
They should be quick to obey .
They can ask themselves : ‘ Do I contribute to the spirituality of those around me ?
Am I quick to accept and support the directions received ? ’ ​ — w16.11 , p .
11 .
When did true Christians come into Babylonian captivity ?
This happened shortly after the apostles died .
At that time , a clergy class began to appear .
Church and State promoted apostate Christianity and tried to drown out the voice of wheatlike Christians .
But in the decades leading up to 1914 , anointed ones began to break free . ​ — w16.11 , pp .
23 - 25 .
Why was the work of Lefèvre d’Étaples significant ?
During the 1520 ’ s , Lefèvre translated the Bible into French to make it available to the common people .
His explanation of Bible passages influenced Martin Luther , William Tyndale , and John Calvin . ​ — wp16.6 , pp .
10 - 12 .
What is the difference between “ setting the mind on the flesh ” and “ setting the mind on the spirit ” ?
( Rom . 8 : 6 )
The one doing the former focuses on the desires and leanings of the imperfect flesh , constantly talking about and glorifying things of the flesh .
A person doing the latter centers his life on things related to God and his thoughts ; such a Christian is dominated by holy spirit .

The former leads to death , the latter to life and peace . ​ — w16.12 , pp .
15 - 17 .
What are some practical ways to reduce anxiety ?
Set appropriate priorities , have realistic expectations , daily make room for some quiet time , enjoy God’s creation , keep a sense of humor , and get regular exercise and enough sleep . ​ — w16.12 , pp .
22 - 23 .
“ Enoch was transferred so as not to see death . ”
( Heb .
11 : 5 ) How ?
It seems that God transferred Enoch gently from life to death without his being aware that he was dying . ​ — wp17.1 , pp .
12 - 13 .
Why is modesty still important ?

Modesty involves having a proper estimate of ourselves and an awareness of our limitations .
We need to be aware of how our behavior can affect others and not take ourselves too seriously . ​ — w17.01 , p .
18 .
What evidence is there that God directed the governing body in the first century just as he is directing those of the Governing Body today ?

With the help of holy spirit , they grasped Scriptural truths .
With angelic aid , they oversaw the preaching work , and they relied on God’s Word when providing guidance .
These factors are true today too . ​ — w17.02 , pp .
26 - 28 .
What factors move us to view the ransom as precious ?
Four factors are : Who gave it , why it was given , what sacrifice was involved , and what real need was filled .
We should meditate on how those factors were involved . ​ — wp17.2 , pp .
4 - 6 .
After deciding a matter , could a Christian change his mind ?
We should keep our word .
Yet , sometimes a decision deserves reconsideration .
After the people repented , God changed his decision about Nineveh .
On occasion , new circumstances or information may require our doing similarly . ​ — w17.03 , pp .
16 - 17 .
Why is negative gossip so dangerous ?
It can cause a problem to get out of control , making the problem worse .
Whether we are right or wrong , engaging in hurtful speech will never improve matters . ​ — w17.04 , p .
21 .
DON , one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Canada , makes a special effort to talk to people living on the street .
Regarding one of these individuals , Don relates : “ A homeless man named Peter was one of the dirtiest men I had ever seen in the back alleys .
He was obnoxious and had a knack for keeping people away from him .


He repeatedly rejected many acts of human kindness . ”
Still , off and on for more than 14 years , Don patiently worked to be kind to this homeless man .
One day , Peter asked Don : “ Why do you bother with me ?
Everyone else just leaves me alone .
Why do you care ? ”
Don tactfully used three scriptures in an effort to reach Peter’s heart .
First , he asked Peter if he knew that God has a personal name and asked him to read it directly from the Bible at Psalm 83 : 18 .

Next , to show why he cared , Don had Peter read Romans 10 : 13 , 14 , which explains that “ everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved . ”
Finally , Don read Matthew 9 : 36 and then asked Peter to read it for himself .
That verse says : “ On seeing the crowds , [ Jesus ] felt pity for them , because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd . ”
At that , with tears in his eyes , Peter asked : “ Am I one of these sheep ? ”
Peter began to change .
He bathed , neatly trimmed his beard , and put on the better clothes that Don offered him .
Peter continued to maintain a clean appearance .
Peter kept a diary .
The early sections of his journal were dark and gloomy , but his more recent entries were different .
One entry read : “ I learned God’s name today .
Now when I pray , I can pray to Jehovah .
It’s wonderful to know his name .
Don says that Jehovah can be my personal Friend , someone who always has time to listen to me , no matter when or what . ”
Peter’s last comments were addressed to his siblings .
He wrote :
“ I’m not feeling well today .
I think that age has caught up with me .
But even if this is my last day , I know that I will see my friend [ Don ] again in Paradise .
If you are reading this , I am no longer around .
But if you see a man at my funeral who does not seem to belong there , talk to him , and please read this little blue book [ referring to the Bible study aid “ The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life ” that he had received years before ] .
* It says that I will once again see my friend in Paradise .
I believe this with all my heart .
Your loving brother , Peter . ”
After the funeral , Peter’s sister Ummi explained : “ About two years ago , Peter contacted me .
For the first time in years , he seemed happy . He even smiled . ”
She told Don : “ I will read the book because anything that could reach my brother must be something special . ”
Ummi also agreed to discuss the more recent book What Does the Bible Really Teach ?
with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses . We too can look beyond outward appearances , express genuine love , and be patient with people of all sorts .
As we do so , we may be able to move people who , like Peter , may not be attractive to human eyes but who have a good heart .
We can be sure that God , who “ sees into the heart , ” will make the truth grow in the hearts of rightly disposed ones . ​ — 1 Sam .
16 : 7 ; John 6 : 44 .
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses but now out of print .
3 They Offered Themselves Willingly ​ — In Turkey
7 Seeking Riches That Are True
This article examines how we can use our material possessions to “ make friends ” in heaven .
It also discusses how we can avoid becoming enslaved to the greedy commercial world and how we can serve Jehovah as fully as possible .
12 “ Weep With Those Who Weep ”
How can a Christian deal with the shock of losing a loved one in death ?
Jehovah provides much - needed consolation by means of Jesus Christ , the Scriptures , and the Christian congregation .
This article will show us how to gain comfort , both for ourselves and for others who are grieving .
17 “ Praise Jah ! ” ​ — Why ?
Psalm 147 repeatedly encourages God’s people to praise Jehovah .
What was it about Jehovah that impressed the psalmist so much that he wanted God to be praised ?

This article explains , and it shows why we should have a like desire to praise our God .
22 “ May He . . .
Give Success to All Your Plans ”
Many young brothers and sisters are zealously entering the full - time service .
Is that your desire ?
This article provides sound advice from the Scriptures that will help you to plan a happy and successful future .
27 Winning the Battle for Your Mind
31 Questions From Readers
Alisa
FIRST - CENTURY Christians made great efforts to reach as many people as possible with the “ good news of the Kingdom . ”
Some even traveled to foreign countries .
For example , the apostle Paul went to the region where modern - day Turkey is situated and preached there extensively during his missionary journeys .
* Some 2,000 years later , in 2014 , Turkey was once again the focus of a special preaching campaign .
Why was the campaign organized ?
Who shared in it ?
There are over 2,800 publishers in Turkey , but the country has a population of 79 million .
This means that the publisher - to - population ratio in Turkey is nearly 1 to 28,000 .
As you can imagine , the publishers have been able to contact only a small number of the inhabitants of this country .
The aim of the special preaching campaign was to reach as many people as possible in a short time .
About 550 Turkish - speaking brothers and sisters from other countries traveled to Turkey and preached alongside the local publishers during the campaign .
What was achieved ?
A widespread witness was given .
One congregation in Istanbul wrote : “ When people saw us , they asked : ‘ Is there a special convention here ?
We see Jehovah’s Witnesses everywhere ! ’ ”
A congregation in the city of Izmir wrote : “ A man working at a taxi stand approached a local elder and asked , ‘ What’s going on ?
Have you increased your activity ? ’ ”
Yes , the campaign was noticed .
Steffen
The foreign participants thoroughly enjoyed the preaching work .
Steffen , who is from Denmark , said : “ Every day , I was able to preach to people who had never heard about Jehovah .
I felt that I was really making Jehovah’s name known . ”
Jean - David from France wrote : “ We preached on just one street for hours . It was wonderful !
Most people didn’t know Jehovah’s Witnesses .
At almost every door , we were able to start a conversation , show one of our videos , and leave literature with the householder . ”
Jean - David ( center )
The 550 participants placed about 60,000 pieces of literature in just two weeks !
The campaign did indeed result in a widespread witness .
Zeal for the ministry increased .
The special activity had a motivating effect on the local brothers .
Many started thinking about full - time service . In fact , the number of regular pioneers in Turkey increased by 24 percent during the 12 months following the campaign .
Şirin
Participants from abroad expressed how the campaign affected their ministry even after they returned to their home countries .
Şirin , a sister from Germany , wrote : “ The brothers in Turkey witness informally with great ease .
I am very shy when it comes to preaching informally .
But thanks to the special campaign , the example of the local brothers , and many prayers , I was able to do what I couldn’t do before .
I even preached and placed tracts in the subway !
Now I am not as shy as before . ”
Johannes
“ I learned some lessons for my own ministry , ” said Johannes from Germany .
“ The brothers in Turkey really want to share the truth with as many people as possible .
They give a witness at every opportunity . I decided to do the same when I returned to Germany .
And now I really do preach to more people than before . ”
Zeynep
“ This campaign affected my personal ministry a lot .
It helped me to be more courageous and to trust more in Jehovah , ” commented Zeynep from France .
The publishers drew closer to one another .
The love and unity among the brothers from different countries made a lasting impression .
“ We ‘ tasted ’ the brothers ’ hospitality , ” said Jean - David , mentioned earlier .
He added : “ They accepted us as their friends and as part of their family .
They opened their homes to us .
I knew that we are an international brotherhood ; I had read it many times in our literature .
But this time , I experienced it firsthand .
I felt even more proud of being one of Jehovah’s people , and I thank him for this wonderful privilege . ”
Claire ( center )
“ Whether from Denmark , France , Germany , or Turkey , we were all one family .
It was as if God had rubbed out all the national borders with a big eraser , ” said Claire from France .
Stéphanie ( center )
Stéphanie from France added : “ The special campaign taught us that what unites us is not the culture or language but the love for Jehovah that we have in common . ”

Many of the foreign participants began to think about moving to Turkey to help with the tremendous work still to be done there .
Quite a few have already moved .
These need - greaters are very much appreciated .
Take , for example , a small isolated group of 25 publishers in one area . For many years , there was only one elder .
Imagine the joy of the publishers when in 2015 , six need - greaters from Germany and the Netherlands moved in to support them !
What do need - greaters who have been in Turkey for a while say about their life there ?
Granted , at times it is challenging , but life as a need - greater is very rewarding .
Consider what some have said :
Federico
“ Not having many material possessions to be attached to helps me to feel free , and it allows me to concentrate on the most important things , ” says Federico , a married brother in his early 40 ’ s who moved from Spain .
Would he recommend this type of service ? “ Yes , absolutely ! ” he says .
“ When you move abroad with the purpose of helping people to get to know Jehovah , you are in reality putting yourself in his hands .
You really feel Jehovah’s care more than ever . ”
Rudy
“ It gives us tremendous satisfaction to serve at the front line , so to speak , and to share the truth with so many people who have never heard about it before , ” says Rudy , a married brother in his late 50 ’ s from the Netherlands .
“ Seeing the happiness of people when they accept the truth is a great source of joy . ”
Sascha
Sascha , a married brother in his early 40 ’ s who moved from Germany , says : “ Every time I am in the ministry , I meet people who are hearing the truth for the very first time .
Giving such ones the opportunity to get to know Jehovah gives me tremendous satisfaction . ”
Atsuko
Atsuko , a married sister in her mid - 30 ’ s from Japan , states : “ In the past , I always wanted Armageddon to come immediately .
But after having moved to Turkey , I thank Jehovah that he is still showing patience .
The more I see how Jehovah directs matters , the more I desire to draw closer to him . ”
Alisa , a sister in her early 30 ’ s from Russia , comments : “ Serving Jehovah in this kind of ministry has helped me to taste all his goodness . ”

She adds : “ Jehovah is not only my Father but also my close Friend , whom I get to know better under different circumstances .
My life is full of happy moments , exciting experiences , and generous blessings ! ”
By means of the special preaching campaign in Turkey , the good news reached many more people .
Yet , there is still a vast untouched territory .
Every day , need - greaters who moved to Turkey meet people who have never heard about Jehovah .
Would you like to serve in such a territory ? If so , we encourage you : “ Lift up your eyes and view the fields , that they are white for harvesting . ”
Could you assist in a part of the world where the fields are “ white for harvesting ” ?
If so , begin taking practical steps now toward reaching that goal .
One thing is sure : Having an increased share in spreading the good news “ to the most distant part of the earth ” will bring you rich blessings beyond compare ! ​ — Acts 1 : 8 .
See the brochure “ See the Good Land , ” pp . 32 - 33 .
“ Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches . ” ​ — LUKE 16 : 9 .
SONGS : 122 , 129
How can material possessions be used to strengthen our friendship with God ?
How can we avoid becoming slaves of today’s commercial world ?
Why are you determined to seek spiritual riches ?
1 , 2 .
In this system of things , why will there always be some poor people ?
TODAY’S economic system is harsh and unfair .
Young people search in vain for employment .
Many risk their lives to move to more prosperous lands .
Poverty is widespread , even in affluent lands .
And the gap between rich and poor is widening .

According to recent estimates , the richest 1 percent of the earth’s population have as much wealth as the rest of its inhabitants combined .
While such a figure is difficult to confirm , no one disputes that billions of people are desperately poor , while others have enough wealth to last for many lifetimes .
Jesus recognized this harsh reality with the words : “ You always have the poor with you . ”
Why such inequality ?
Jesus understood that the current economic system would not change until God’s Kingdom comes .
Along with the political and religious elements , the greedy commercial system , represented by “ the merchants ” of Revelation 18 : 3 , constitutes part of Satan’s world .
Unlike the complete separation that God’s people maintain from politics and false religion , most cannot separate themselves completely from the commercial part of Satan’s world .
What questions will we consider ?
As Christians , we do well to examine our view of today’s commercial system by asking ourselves such questions as these : ‘ How can I use my material possessions to show faithfulness to God ?
How can I minimize involvement with the commercial world ?
What experiences show that God’s people fully trust in him in this challenging environment ? ’
4 , 5 . ( a ) In what situation did the steward of Jesus ’ illustration find himself ?
( b ) What admonition did Jesus give his followers ?
Read Luke 16 : 1 - 9 .

Jesus ’ illustration of the unrighteous steward is thought - provoking .
After being accused of wastefulness , the steward acted with “ practical wisdom ” to “ make friends ” to help him when he lost his stewardship .
* Jesus , of course , was not encouraging his disciples to act in an unrighteous way in order to survive in this world .
He labeled such behavior as that of “ the sons of this system of things , ” but he used the illustration to drive home a point .
Jesus knew that like the steward who found himself in a difficult situation , most of Jesus ’ followers would need to make a living in this unjust commercial world .
So he urges them : “ Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches , so that when such fail , they [ Jehovah and Jesus ] may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places . ”
What can we learn from Jesus ’ counsel ?
How do we know that today’s commercial system was not part of God’s purpose ?
Although Jesus does not explain why he calls riches “ unrighteous , ” the Bible makes clear that commercialism was not part of God’s purpose .
Jehovah provided abundantly for Adam and Eve’s needs in Eden .
Later , when holy spirit operated on the first - century congregation of anointed ones , “ not even one of them would say that any of the things he possessed was his own , but they had all things in common . ”

The prophet Isaiah pointed to the time when all humans would freely enjoy earth’s material resources .

But in the meantime , Jesus ’ followers would need “ practical wisdom ” to make a living , using the “ unrighteous riches ” of today’s world while seeking to please God .
What counsel is found at Luke 16 : 10 - 13 ?
Read Luke 16 : 10 - 13 .
The steward in Jesus ’ illustration made friends for personal benefit . However , Jesus urged his followers to make friends in heaven for unselfish purposes .
The verses that follow the illustration connect the use of “ unrighteous riches ” with faithfulness to God .
Jesus ’ point was that we can ‘ prove ourselves faithful ’ with , or control , those riches once we obtain them .
How so ?
8 , 9 .
Give examples of how some are showing faithfulness in their use of unrighteous riches .
An obvious way to prove ourselves faithful with our material things is by contributing financially to the worldwide preaching work that Jesus foretold would take place .
A young girl in India kept a small money box and gradually added coins , even giving up toys to do so .

When the box was full , she handed the money over to be used for the preaching work .
A brother in India who has a coconut farm contributed a large number of coconuts to the Malayalam remote translation office , reasoning that since the office needs to buy coconuts , his supplying them directly will help his contribution to go further than it would if he gave cash .
That is practical wisdom .
Likewise , brothers in Greece regularly contribute olive oil , cheese , and other foods for the Bethel family .
A brother from Sri Lanka , now living abroad , has made his property back home available for meetings and assemblies and for housing full - time servants .

It is a financial sacrifice for the brother but a great help to the local publishers of little means .
In a land where the work is restricted , brothers make their homes available for use as local Kingdom Halls , allowing many pioneers and others with limited funds to have a meeting place without a financial burden .
What are some blessings we receive when we give generously ?
The foregoing examples show how God’s people are “ faithful in what is least , ” that is , in their use of material wealth , which is inferior to spiritual riches .
How do these friends of Jehovah feel about making such sacrifices ?
They understand that being generous is a way to gain “ true ” riches .
A sister who contributes regularly to the Kingdom work tells of a blessing she has received : “ By being materially generous , I have experienced an unusual phenomenon within myself over the years .
I find that the more generous I am materially , the more generous my disposition toward others has become .
I am more generous in being forgiving , in being patient with others , and in being able to accept disappointments and counsel . ”
Many have learned that generosity is spiritually enriching . ​ — Ps .
112 : 5 ; Prov . 22 : 9 .
( a ) How does our freely giving show “ practical wisdom ” ?
( b ) What equalizing of finances is taking place among God’s people ?
( See opening picture . )
Using material assets to advance Kingdom interests shows “ practical wisdom ” in another way .

It allows us to take advantage of our circumstances to help others .
Those who have this world’s means but cannot share in the full - time ministry or move abroad have the satisfaction of knowing that their donated funds support the ministry of others .
Voluntary contributions help to supply literature and support the preaching work in territories where poverty abounds but where there is great spiritual growth .
For years , in such lands as Congo , Madagascar , and Rwanda , brothers often had to choose between having food for their families and having copies of the Bible , which sometimes cost the equivalent of a weekly or a monthly wage .
Now , by means of the contributions of many and “ an equalizing ” of finances , Jehovah’s organization has sponsored the translation and distribution of Bibles to each member of the family as well as to spiritually hungry Bible students .
( Read 2 Corinthians 8 : 13 - 15 . )
Thus , Jehovah’s friendship is being freely extended to both the givers and the receivers .
How did Abraham show that he trusted in God ?
Another way to gain friendship with Jehovah is by minimizing our involvement with the commercial world and using our circumstances to seek “ true ” riches .
Abraham , a man of faith in ancient times , obediently left prosperous Ur in order to live in tents and pursue his friendship with Jehovah .

He always looked to God as the Source of true wealth , never seeking material advantages that would indicate a lack of trust .
Jesus encouraged this sort of faith , telling a rich young man : “ If you want to be perfect , go sell your belongings and give to the poor , and you will have treasure in heaven ; and come be my follower . ”
That man lacked faith like that of Abraham , but others have shown implicit trust in God .
( a ) What admonition did Paul give to Timothy ?
( b ) How can we apply Paul’s counsel today ?
Timothy was a man of faith .

After calling Timothy “ a fine soldier of Christ Jesus , ” Paul told him : “ No man serving as a soldier involves himself in the commercial businesses of life , in order to gain the approval of the one who enrolled him as a soldier . ”
Jesus ’ followers today , including an army of over one million full - time ministers , apply Paul’s counsel to the extent that their circumstances allow .
Resisting the pressures of advertising and the world around them , they remember the principle : “ The borrower is a slave to the lender . ”
Satan would like nothing better than to have us spend all our time and energy as slaves to his commercial world .

Some decisions could keep us in financial bondage for years .
Huge home mortgages , lingering student loans , expensive car payments , even extravagant weddings can result in great financial pressure .
We demonstrate practical wisdom when we simplify our life and reduce debt and expenses , setting ourselves free to slave for God rather than for today’s commercial system . ​ — 1 Tim .
6 : 10 .
What kind of determination is needed ?
Give examples .
Keeping our life simple involves setting priorities .
One couple owned a thriving manufacturing business .
However , their desire to reenter the full - time ministry compelled them to sell the business , their boat , and other material items .
They then volunteered to help with the construction of world headquarters in Warwick , New York .
A special blessing for them has been to serve at Bethel with their daughter and son - in - law and , for some weeks , with the husband’s parents , who also worked on the Warwick project .
A pioneer sister in Colorado , U.S.A . , found part - time employment at a bank .
The staff was so pleased with her work that she was offered a full - time position at triple her salary .
However , since the job would diminish her focus on the ministry , she turned down this lucrative offer .
These are just a few examples of the countless sacrifices made by servants of Jehovah .
Such determination to put Kingdom interests first shows that we value God’s friendship and spiritual riches far more than what today’s commercial world can offer .
What riches bring the greatest satisfaction ?
Material wealth is not necessarily an indication of God’s blessing .
Jehovah blesses those who are “ rich in fine works . ”
( Read 1 Timothy 6 : 17 - 19 . )
For example , when Lucia * learned of the need for ministers in Albania , she moved there from Italy in 1993 with no means of support , trusting fully in Jehovah .

She mastered the Albanian language and has helped over 60 individuals to the point of dedication .
While the majority of God’s people do not preach in such fruitful territories , anything we do to help others find and stay on the road to life is something that we and they will treasure forever . ​ — Matt .
6 : 20 .
( a ) What lies ahead for today’s commercial system ?
( b ) How should what we know about the future affect our view of material wealth ?
Jesus said : “ When such [ unrighteous riches ] fail , ” not ‘ if they fail . ’

Bank and economic collapses that have occurred in these last days are insignificant when compared with what will happen on a world scale in the near future .

Satan’s entire system ​ — political , religious , and commercial — ​ is destined to fail .
The prophets Ezekiel and Zephaniah foretold that gold and silver , staples of the commercial world through the centuries , will become worthless .
How would we feel if we reached the end of our life in this world and realized that we had sacrificed true riches for a vast store of this world’s “ unrighteous riches ” ?
We could feel like a man who has worked all his life for a pile of money , only to learn that it is counterfeit .
Yes , such riches will ultimately fail , so do not lose the opportunity to use them to “ make friends ” in heaven .
Whatever we do to advance the interests of Jehovah’s Kingdom makes us spiritually rich .
17 , 18 .
What is in store for friends of God ?
When God’s Kingdom does come , rent and mortgages will cease , food will be free and plentiful , health - care costs will disappear .
Jehovah’s earthly family will enjoy the best that the earth has to offer .
Gold , silver , and gems will be for adornment , not for investment or hoarding .
High - quality materials of wood , stone , and metal will be freely available to build beautiful homes .
Friends will assist us for sheer satisfaction , not for money .
A new system of sharing earth’s bounties will be a way of life .
This is just part of the priceless inheritance for those who make friends in heaven .
The rejoicing of Jehovah’s earthly worshippers will know no bounds when they hear Jesus ’ words : “ Come , you who have been blessed by my Father , inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world . ” ​ — Matt .
25 : 34 .
Jesus does not indicate whether the accusation was valid .
The Greek word rendered “ accused ” at Luke 16 : 1 allows for the idea that the steward was slandered .
Jesus , though , focuses on the steward’s reaction , not on the reasons for the dismissal .
The life story of Lucia Moussanett appears in the June 22 , 2003 , issue of Awake ! , pp .
18 - 22 .
Our worldwide Bible educational work and humanitarian activities are supported by voluntary donations .
To donate online , go to jw.org and click the “ Make a Donation to Our Worldwide Work ” link near the bottom of any page .
“ Keep encouraging one another and building one another up . ” ​ — 1 THESS .
5 : 11 .
SONGS : 90 , 111
How does Jehovah provide consolation ?
Which scriptures can comfort the bereaved ?
How can the congregation provide comfort to those who are mourning ?
1 , 2 .
Why do we need to discuss how to provide consolation for the bereaved ?
( See opening picture . )
“ FOR almost a year after the death of our son , we felt deep and excruciating pain , ” said Susi .
Another Christian said that when his wife died suddenly , he experienced “ indescribable physical pain . ”
Sadly , countless others experience this kind of agony .
Many in the Christian congregation may not have expected their loved ones to die this side of Armageddon .
Whether you have personally lost a loved one in death or know someone who is bereaved , you may wonder , ‘ How can grieving ones be helped to deal with their heartache ? ’
Perhaps you have heard it said that time is a great healer .
However , does it really follow that time by itself will heal a broken heart ?
One widow observed , “ I have found it more accurate to say that it is what one does with one’s time that helps one to heal . ”
Yes , like a physical wound , the pain of an emotional wound may gradually ease over time if it is given tender care .
What , specifically , can help bereaved individuals heal their painful emotional wounds ?
3 , 4 .
Why can we be sure that Jehovah understands a grieving person’s need for comfort ?
Without a doubt , the primary source of consolation is our compassionate heavenly Father , Jehovah .
( Read 2 Corinthians 1 : 3 , 4 . )
Jehovah , the foremost example of empathy , assured his people : “ I myself am the One comforting you . ” ​ — Isa .
51 : 12 ; Ps .
119 : 50 , 52 , 76 .
Our Father of tender mercies has himself experienced the loss of loved ones , such as Abraham , Isaac , Jacob , Moses , and King David .
God’s Word assures us that Jehovah has eagerly anticipated ​ — has had an earnest longing for — ​ the time when he will bring them back to life .
They will be happy and in vibrant health .
Consider , too , that God’s dearly beloved Son ​ — “ the one he was especially fond of ” — ​ died an agonizing death .
Words cannot express the pain Jehovah must have suffered . ​ — John 5 : 20 ; 10 : 17 .
5 , 6 .
How can we be consoled by Jehovah ?
We can have unwavering confidence that Jehovah will act in our behalf .
We should therefore not hesitate to pour out our hearts to him in prayer concerning our personal grief .
How comforting it is to know that Jehovah understands our pain and provides the comfort that we so sorely need !
But how does he do so ?
One way God helps us is by means of “ the comfort of the holy spirit . ”
God’s active force is a very powerful source of comfort .
Jesus promised that the Father in heaven would eagerly “ give holy spirit to those asking him . ”
Susi , quoted earlier , says : “ There were so many times when we just dropped to our knees and implored Jehovah to comfort us .
Every single time , the peace of God truly guarded our hearts and minds . ” ​ — Read Philippians 4 : 6 , 7 .
7 , 8 .
Why can we be confident that Jesus will provide comfort ?
Jehovah’s tender empathy was perfectly expressed in the words and actions of his compassionate Son , Jesus , when he was on earth .
Jesus was sent to provide comfort for “ the brokenhearted ” and “ all who mourn . ”
Hence , he was characterized by deep compassion ​ — a sympathetic awareness of people’s suffering and a heartfelt desire to alleviate their suffering . ​ — Heb .
2 : 17 .
In his younger years , Jesus no doubt had to deal with the deaths of family members and acquaintances .
It seems likely that Joseph , his adoptive father , died when Jesus was still a relatively young man .
* Imagine how the tenderhearted Jesus , perhaps just in his teens or early 20 ’ s , had to deal with his own grief , as well as that of his mother , brothers , and sisters .
How did Jesus show empathy when Lazarus died ?
When Jesus embarked on his ministry , it was with a remarkable depth of insight and fellow feeling .
Take , for example , the time when his dear friend Lazarus died .
Even though Jesus knew that he was going to resurrect Lazarus , he felt the painful sting of sorrow that overwhelmed Mary and Martha .
He was so moved that a surge of strong empathetic feeling cut him to the heart and brought him to tears . ​ — John 11 : 33 - 36 .
Why can we be confident of Jesus ’ sympathy today ?
How can Jesus ’ expressions of sympathy and consolation help us today ?
The Scriptures reassure us that “ Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today , and forever . ”
Since “ the Chief Agent of life ” personally understands what it is like to feel grief , “ he is able to come to the aid of those who are being put to the test . ”
Therefore , we can be confident that Christ continues to be moved by the anguish of others , to understand their grief , and to provide them consolation “ at the right time . ” ​ — Read Hebrews 4 : 15 , 16 .
Which scriptures do you find particularly comforting ?
The account about Jesus ’ intense grief at the time of Lazarus ’ death is just one of countless consoling scriptures found in God’s comforting Word .
And no wonder , “ for all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction , so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope . ”
If you are grieving , you too can find soothing comfort from such scriptures as the following :
“ Jehovah is close to the brokenhearted ; he saves those who are crushed in spirit . ” ​ — Ps .
34 : 18 , 19 .
“ When anxieties overwhelmed me , you [ Jehovah ] comforted and soothed me . ” ​ — Ps .
94 : 19 .
“ May our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father , who loved us and gave everlasting comfort and good hope by means of undeserved kindness , comfort your hearts and make you firm . ” ​ — 2 Thess .
2 : 16 , 17 .
*
What is one important way in which we can be a source of comfort to others ?
Another source of comfort to grieving ones is the Christian congregation .
( Read 1 Thessalonians 5 : 11 . )
How can you strengthen and console those who have “ a crushed spirit ” ?
Bear in mind that there is “ a time to be silent and a time to speak . ”
A widow named Dalene explains : “ Bereaved ones need to express their thoughts and feelings .
Therefore , the most important thing you can do for a bereaved person is to listen ​ — without interrupting . ”
Junia , whose brother took his own life , adds : “ Even though you may not be able to grasp their grief completely , what counts is that you want to understand how they feel . ”
What do we need to remember about grief ?
Remember , too , that not everyone experiences and expresses grief in the same way .
At times , only a person’s own heart grasps the full depth of the emotional pain , and it may be difficult for him to voice his innermost feelings .
God’s Word states : “ The heart knows its own bitterness , and no outsider can share in its joy . ”

Even when someone does express how he feels , it is not always easy for others to understand what he is trying to say .
How can we provide words of comfort to the bereaved ?
Understandably , then , it can be difficult to know what to say to someone who is overwhelmed by grief .
Nevertheless , the Bible states that “ the tongue of the wise is a healing . ”
Many have found comforting thoughts to share from the brochure When Someone You Love Dies .
* Often , though , the most helpful thing you can do is to “ weep with those who weep . ”
“ Tears have become the language of my heart , ” admits Gaby , whose husband died .
“ That is why I get some comfort when friends cry with me .
At that moment , I don’t feel quite so alone in my grief . ”
How might we provide consolation if we find it difficult to do so in person ?
( See also the box “ Soothing Words of Consolation . ” )
If you find it difficult to say something in person , it may be easier to provide consolation by means of a sympathy card , an e - mail , a text message , or a letter .
You could simply quote a comforting scripture , recall some memorable characteristic or quality of the deceased , or share a happy memory that you cherish .
“ Receiving a short encouraging message or an invitation to spend time with a fellow Christian helps me more than I can say , ” says Junia .
“ Those expressions make me feel loved and cared for . ”
What is a particularly effective way to provide consolation ?

Do not underestimate the value of your prayers with and for a bereaved fellow Christian .
Even though it may be difficult to express your prayerful thoughts in such an emotional situation , your heartfelt supplication in his behalf , even through tears and an unsteady voice , can be a powerful antidote to grief .
“ Sometimes when sisters have come to comfort me , ” recalls Dalene , “ I have asked them if they are willing to say a prayer .
They start praying , often battling to speak at first , but every time , within a few sentences , their voice gets stronger and they say the most heartfelt prayer .
Their strong faith , their love , and their concern have been very faith - strengthening . ”
17 - 19 .
Why is there an ongoing need to give comfort ?
The grieving process can vary greatly from person to person .
Therefore , make yourself available , not just for the first few days when many friends and relatives are present , but in subsequent months when others have returned to their normal routine .
“ A true friend shows love at all times , and is a brother who is born for times of distress . ”

Fellow Christians can be a source of profound comfort for someone for as long as it takes him or her to deal with grief . ​ — Read 1 Thessalonians 3 : 7 .
Remember that bereaved ones may experience pangs of grief triggered by anniversaries , certain music , photographs , activities , or even a specific smell , sound , or season of the year .
Many things a bereaved marriage mate does alone for the first time ​ — such as attending an assembly or the Memorial — ​ can be particularly painful .
“ I expected my first wedding anniversary to be very traumatic , ” relates one brother , “ and it was not easy .
But a few brothers and sisters planned a small gathering of my closest friends so that I wouldn’t be on my own . ”
Bear in mind , though , that bereaved ones need encouragement not only on special occasions .
“ Often the help and companionship offered when there is no special anniversary can be very beneficial , ” explains Junia .
“ Those spontaneous moments are so valuable and bring much comfort . ”
True , we cannot eliminate all the grief or completely fill the void caused by the death of a loved one , but we can bring a measure of comfort and consolation by taking practical action to assist the bereaved .
Gaby recalls : “ I am truly grateful to Jehovah for the loving elders who walked me through every difficult step of the way .
They have truly made me feel Jehovah’s loving arms around me . ”
Why are Jehovah’s promises a source of great comfort ?
How comforting it is to know that Jehovah , the God of all comfort , will eliminate all grief and provide permanent consolation when “ all those in the memorial tombs will hear [ Christ’s ] voice and come out ” !
God promises that “ he will do away with death forever , and the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces . ”
Then , instead of having to “ weep with those who weep , ” all earth’s inhabitants will “ rejoice with those who rejoice . ” ​ — Rom .
12 : 15 .
The last mention of Joseph was when Jesus was 12 years old .
When Jesus performed his first miracle , turning water into wine , there was no mention of Joseph ​ — then or on any subsequent occasion .
When on the torture stake , Jesus entrusted Mary to the care of the apostle John , which Jesus would not likely have done had Joseph still been alive . ​ — John 19 : 26 , 27 .
Other scriptures that many have found comforting are Psalm 20 : 1 , 2 ; 31 : 7 ; 38 : 8 , 9 , 15 ; 55 : 22 ; 121 : 1 , 2 ; Isaiah 57 : 15 ; 66 : 13 ; Philippians 4 : 13 ; and 1 Peter 5 : 7 .
See also the article “ Comfort the Bereaved , as Jesus Did ” in the November 1 , 2010 , issue of The Watchtower .
Here is what some have written to comfort bereaved friends :
“ We don’t know what to say except that we love you .
We can’t understand exactly how you feel , but Jehovah does and will keep raising you up .
We hope that our prayers will help a little . ”
“ May Jehovah sustain you at this time of such great loss . ”
“ May you find comfort in knowing that your dear one is safe in the memory of God , who will remember every detail about him and bring him back again . ”

“ Your loved one will never have to face the last enemy , death , ever again .
In the meantime , his acts of faith live on until he stands up alive and whole in the Paradise . ”
“ While words fail to capture the pain of losing a loved one , we look forward to the time when words will fail to capture the joy of having our heavenly Father return your dear one to you . ”
While Christians may take reasonable steps to ensure their personal security , they do so within the framework of Bible principles .
These advise against the use of carnal weapons , such as handguns , rifles , or other firearms , for protection against other humans .
Consider the following :
In Jehovah’s eyes , life ​ — especially human life — ​ is sacred .
The psalmist David knew that Jehovah “ is the source of life . ”
Hence , if a Christian chooses to take reasonable measures to defend himself or his property , he would do everything in his power to avoid taking a human life and becoming bloodguilty . ​ — Deut .
22 : 8 ; Ps .
51 : 14 .
Although using any number of objects could lead to incurring bloodguilt , guns make it easier to kill someone ​ — accidentally or deliberately .

* Moreover , if an attacker ​ — who may already be tense — ​ sees that the other person has a firearm , the situation is very likely to escalate and a death might result .
When Jesus told his followers to equip themselves with swords on the final night of his life on earth , he did not have protection in mind .
Rather , Jesus had them bring a sword for an object lesson to teach them not to resort to violence , even when confronted by an armed crowd .
After Peter wielded one of the swords against the high priest’s slave , Jesus commanded Peter : “ Return your sword to its place . ”
Then Jesus stated a fundamental truth , a principle that guides his followers to this day : “ All those who take up the sword will perish by the sword . ” ​ — Matt .
26 : 51 , 52 .
In harmony with Micah 4 : 3 , God’s people “ beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears . ”
This identifying trait of true Christians harmonizes with the apostle Paul’s inspired exhortation : “ Return evil for evil to no one . . . .
If possible , as far as it depends on you , be peaceable with all men . ”
Despite the many troubles that Paul experienced , including “ dangers from robbers , ” he lived by his words , never putting personal security above Scriptural principles .
Instead , he trusted in God and in the wisdom found in His Word ​ — wisdom that “ is better than weapons of war . ” ​ — Eccl .
9 : 18 .
Christians consider life to be far more valuable than material things .
“ Life does not result from the things [ a man ] possesses . ”
Thus , if a mild tongue fails to stop an armed robber , wise Christians heed the principle embodied in Jesus ’ words : “ Do not resist the one who is wicked . ”
It may even require that we give up our inner and outer garments , so to speak .
* The best strategy , of course , is prevention .
If we shun “ the showy display of [ our ] means of life ” and are known by our neighbors as peace - loving Witnesses of Jehovah , we may avoid being targeted by violent criminals . ​ — 1 John 2 : 16 ; Prov .
18 : 10 . Christians respect others ’ consciences .
If it became known that a member of the congregation kept a gun for protection against humans , some fellow believers might be shocked , even stumbled .
Love moves us to put others ’ interests ahead of our own , even when that means putting aside what we may feel is a legal right . ​ — 1 Cor .
10 : 32 , 33 ; 13 : 4 , 5 .
Christians strive to be exemplary .
After receiving Scriptural counsel , a Christian who continues to keep a gun for protection against other humans could not be considered exemplary .
He would therefore not qualify for responsibilities or special privileges in the congregation .
The same applies to a Christian who continues to carry a firearm as part of his secular work .
How much better to seek other employment !
*
How a Christian chooses to protect himself , his family , or his possessions is , of course , largely a personal matter , as is his choice of employment .
That said , Bible principles reflect God’s wisdom and his love for us .
Out of regard for those principles , spiritually mature Christians choose not to keep a firearm for protection against other humans .
They know that true and lasting security comes to those who demonstrate trust in God by living in harmony with Bible principles . ​ — Ps .
97 : 10 ; Prov . 1 : 33 ; 2 : 6 , 7 .
During the great tribulation , Christians will rely on Jehovah and not try to defend themselves
A Christian might decide to own a firearm ( such as a rifle or a shotgun ) for hunting animals for food or for protection against wild animals .
When not in use , though , such weapons are best kept unloaded , perhaps even disassembled , and safely locked away .
Where gun ownership is illegal , restricted , or regulated in some other way , Christians obey the law . ​ — Rom .
13 : 1 .
Regarding the matter of defending oneself against rape , see the article “ How to Prevent Rape ” in the March 8 , 1993 , issue of Awake !
Further details on the question of accepting employment that involves being armed are found in The Watchtower of November 1 , 2005 , p . 31 ; and July 15 , 1983 , pp . 25 - 26 .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
In an apple orchard in Grójec , a publisher shares the Bible’s message with one of the workers
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
“ Praise Jah ! . . . How pleasant and fitting it is to praise him ! ” ​ — PS .
147 : 1 .
SONGS : 59 , 3
appreciate Jehovah’s personal interest in you ?
have confidence that God will rescue you ?
see how Jehovah sustains his people with his Word ?
1 - 3 . ( a ) Apparently , when was Psalm 147 written ?
( b ) What can we learn from studying Psalm 147 ?
WHEN someone has done well at an assigned task or has displayed a remarkable Christian quality , he deserves praise .
If that is true of humans , how much more do we have reason to praise Jehovah God !
We can praise him because of his immense power , as seen in the wonders of his creation , or because of his warm dealings with humankind , as evidenced by his provision of the ransom sacrifice of his own Son .
The writer of the 147th Psalm was moved to praise Jehovah .
He also encouraged others to join him in giving God praise . ​ — Read Psalm 147 : 1 , 7 , 12 .
We do not know who wrote this psalm , but the psalmist apparently lived about the time when Jehovah restored the Israelites to Jerusalem from Babylonian exile .
The restoration of God’s people to their place of true worship would certainly have moved the psalmist to praise Jehovah .
Still , he stated additional reasons to do so .
What were they ?
What reasons do you have to cry out “ Hallelujah ! ”
in your own life ? ​ — Ps . 147 : 1 , ftn .
When King Cyrus liberated the exiled Israelites , how must they have felt , and why ?

Imagine how the exiled Israelites must have felt in Babylon .
Their captors jeered : “ Sing for us one of the songs of Zion . ”
By then Jerusalem , their greatest reason to rejoice in Jehovah , had been desolated .
The Jews did not feel like singing .
Their hearts were broken , and they needed comfort and consolation .
However , true to God’s prophetic word , deliverance came through Cyrus , king of Persia .
He conquered Babylon and proclaimed : “ Jehovah . . . has commissioned me to build him a house in Jerusalem . . .
Whoever there is among you of all his people , may Jehovah his God be with him , and let him go up . ”
What a comforting effect this development must have had on the Israelites dwelling in Babylon !
What does the psalmist observe about Jehovah’s healing power ?
Jehovah gave comfort not only to the nation of Israel as a whole but also to each individual .
The same is true today .
The psalmist wrote of God : “ He heals the brokenhearted ; he binds up their wounds . ”
Yes , Jehovah cares for those who are having problems ​ — whether physical or emotional .
Today , Jehovah is eager to comfort us and to soothe our emotional wounds .
He gives us wisdom and strength so that we can cope with any troubles we may face . ​ — Jas .
1 : 5 .
How can we benefit from the psalmist’s seeming change of subject at Psalm 147 : 4 ?
( See opening picture . )
The psalmist then turns his attention to the heavens above , telling us that Jehovah “ counts the number of the stars ” and “ calls all of them by name . ”
Why the seeming change of subject and reference to heavenly bodies ?
Consider this : The psalmist could see the stars with his physical eyes , but he had no idea of how many there really are .
Over the years , the number of stars that we can see has increased tremendously .
Some think that there are billions of stars in our Milky Way galaxy alone .
And there may be trillions of galaxies in the universe !
To us , stars are indeed without number !
But the Creator gives all of them a name or a designation .
This means that each star is unique to Jehovah . What about his human creatures on earth ?
The God who knows where each star is at any given time also knows you as an individual ​ — exactly where you are , precisely how you feel , and specifically what you need at any given moment !
7 , 8 . ( a ) When Jehovah saves his people from their trials , what does he take into consideration ?
( b ) Illustrate how compassionate Jehovah is in helping imperfect humans .
Not only is Jehovah interested in you as a person but he also has the power and empathy needed to help you with life’s problems .
( Read Psalm 147 : 5 . )
You may feel that your situation is too difficult and the load too heavy for you to carry .
God understands your limitations , ‘ remembering that you are dust . ’
Being imperfect , we make the same mistakes again and again .
Oh , how we regret that slip of the tongue , those fleshly tendencies that flare up every now and then , or those inclinations to envy what others have !
Jehovah does not experience such shortcomings himself ; yet , his understanding of us is immeasurable , unsearchable ! ​ — Isa .
40 : 28 .
You may already have experienced how Jehovah’s mighty hand helped you to recover from some trial .
Take , for example , Kyoko , a pioneer sister who became very discouraged after moving to a new assignment .

How did Jehovah show his understanding of her problems ?
In her new circumstances , Kyoko found herself surrounded by individuals who could understand her feelings .
She felt that Jehovah was telling her : “ I love you , not just because you are a pioneer , but because you are my daughter and dedicated to me .
I want you to enjoy your life as one of my Witnesses ! ”
In your case , how has the Almighty shown that “ his understanding is beyond measure ” ?
9 , 10 .
What comes first when Jehovah extends help to us ?
Illustrate .
Sometimes your needs may be physical .
For instance , you may worry that you will not have enough food to eat .
However , it is Jehovah who created the natural cycle needed to grow food , even for young ravens that call out for it !
( Read Psalm 147 : 8 , 9 . )
If he continues to feed the ravens , you can trust that Jehovah will provide your material necessities too . ​ — Ps .
37 : 25 .

Most important , Jehovah provides spiritual sustenance , giving us “ the peace of God that surpasses all understanding . ”
Consider , for example , Mutsuo and his wife , who experienced Jehovah’s sustaining power following the 2011 Japan tsunami .
By climbing to the roof of their house , they barely escaped the tsunami .
However , that day they lost almost everything they owned .
They spent the dark , cold night in a room on the second floor of their battered home .
In the morning , they looked for some spiritual encouragement .
The only book they could find was the 2006 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses .
Immediately , the heading “ The Deadliest Tsunamis Ever Recorded ” caught Mutsuo’s eye .
It was about an earthquake in Sumatra that in 2004 triggered the most devastating tsunamis in recorded history .
Mutsuo and his wife wept as they read through the experiences .
They felt God’s warm , loving care in providing the right spiritual encouragement just when they needed it .
Jehovah also lovingly provided for them materially .
Through their spiritual brothers , they received relief supplies . But what strengthened them most were the visits made to the congregation by the representatives of God’s organization .
Mutsuo says : “ I felt that Jehovah was right next to each one of us and caring for us .
What comfort ! ”
God provides spiritual sustenance first , and then he satisfies our physical needs .
What is required of those who hope to benefit from God’s saving power ?
Jehovah is always ready to step in and ‘ raise up the meek . ’
But how can we benefit from his readiness to act in our behalf ?
We have to have a good relationship with him .
To have that , we need to cultivate meekness .
Meek ones wait on God to correct any wrongs and to undo the injuries inflicted on them .
Jehovah looks on such ones with his smile of approval .
12 , 13 . ( a ) To benefit from God’s help , what should we avoid ?
( b ) With whom does Jehovah find pleasure ?
On the other hand , God “ hurls the wicked to the ground . ”
These are strong words !
To benefit from Jehovah’s loyal love and to avoid his wrath , we have to hate what he hates .
For instance , we are to hate sexual immorality .
This means that we have to stay away from anything that could lead us into such wrongdoing , including pornography .
This may be a hard fight , but having Jehovah’s blessing is worth any effort we must put forth .
In fighting this battle , we need to rely on Jehovah , not on ourselves .
Will he be pleased if we try to save ourselves with “ the power of the horse , ” that is , where humans turn for help ?
No !
Neither are we to rely on “ the strong legs of a man , ” acting as if we or some other human could bring salvation .
Rather , we must approach Jehovah , begging for his help .
Unlike human counselors , he never gets tired of hearing our petitions , even when we ask for his help over and over .
“ Jehovah finds pleasure in those who fear him , in those waiting for his loyal love . ”
We can trust that in his loyal love , he will stick with us and help us to conquer our wrong desires .

What conviction strengthened the psalmist ?
Jehovah gives us a basis for being convinced that he will help his people when they are in need .
In thinking about the restoration of Jerusalem , the psalmist sang about Jehovah : “ He makes the bars of your city gates strong ; he blesses your sons within you .
He brings peace to your territory . ”
How reassuring it was for the psalmist to know that God would strengthen the city’s gates to provide protection for his worshippers !
How can God’s Word help when we feel overwhelmed by trials ?
( See paragraphs 15 - 17 )
15 - 17 . ( a ) How might we at times feel about our trials , but how does Jehovah use his Word to help us ?

( b ) Illustrate how ‘ God’s word runs swiftly . ’
You may face difficulties that cause you to become anxious . Jehovah can give you the wisdom to cope .
The psalmist said of his God that “ he sends his command to the earth ; his word runs swiftly . ”
Then , referring to Jehovah as ‘ sending the snow , scattering the frost , and hurling down the hailstones , ’ the psalmist asks : “ Who can withstand his cold ? ”
He adds that Jehovah “ sends out his word , and they melt . ”
Our all - wise , all - powerful God , the one who controls the hail and the snow , can help you to surmount any obstacles that you encounter .
Today , Jehovah guides us with his Word , the Bible .
And “ his word runs swiftly ” in that he readily gives us spiritual direction when we need it .
Think about how you benefit from reading the Bible , examining the publications of “ the faithful and discreet slave , ” watching JW Broadcasting , visiting jw.org , talking with the elders , and associating with fellow Christians .
Have you not seen that Jehovah is swift to provide you with his guidance ?
Simone has experienced the power of God’s Word .
She had very low self - worth , to the point of doubting that she was the kind of person God would approve of .
However , during times of discouragement , she persevered in prayer , turning to Jehovah for his help .
She also kept busy in her personal study of the Bible .
She says , “ I have never been in a situation where I have not felt Jehovah’s strength and his guidance . ”

This has helped her to try to remain as positive as possible .
Why do you feel favored by God , and what reasons do you have to cry out “ Praise Jah ! ” ?
The psalmist knew how favored God’s ancient people were .
They were the only nation given God’s “ word ” and “ his regulations and judgments . ”
( Read Psalm 147 : 19 , 20 . )
Today , we are blessed to be the only ones on earth called by God’s name .
Knowing Jehovah and having his Word at work in our lives , we have come to enjoy a privileged relationship with him .
Like the writer of Psalm 147 , do you not have many good reasons to cry out “ Praise Jah ! ” and to encourage others to do the same ?
“ Find exquisite delight in Jehovah , and he will grant you the desires of your heart . ” ​ — PS .
37 : 4 .
SONGS : 135 , 81
What plans can lead to a happy future for you ?
What does sharing in full - time service teach a young person ?
What could a life in the pioneer service lead to ?
What must a young person decide about the future , but why is there no need to be overly anxious ?
( See opening picture . )
YOU young ones will probably agree that before starting a journey , it is wise to plan where you will go .
Life is like a journey , and the time to plan where you want to go is when you are young .
Of course , making plans can be challenging .
A girl named Heather says : “ It’s scary .
You have to decide what to do with the rest of your life . ” But take courage .
Jehovah says to his people : “ Do not be anxious , for I am your God .
I will fortify you , yes , I will help you . ” ​ — Isa .
41 : 10 .
How do you know that Jehovah wants you to plan for a happy future ?
Jehovah urges you to plan wisely for your future .
He wants you to be happy .
The delightful sights , sounds , and tastes of creation tell you that .
Consider , too , how he cares for us and teaches us the best way of life .
To those who reject his advice , Jehovah says : “ You chose what displeased me . . . .
Look ! My servants will rejoice , but you will suffer shame .
Look !
My servants will shout joyfully because of the good condition of the heart . ” Jehovah is glorified when his people make wise choices in life . ​ — Prov . 27 : 11 .
What does Jehovah recommend for you ?
What plans does Jehovah recommend for you ?
He created humans to find happiness by knowing him and by serving him faithfully .
This is in sharp contrast with the animals he created , which are content merely to eat , drink , and produce offspring .
God wants you to find happiness by planning for things other than those that satisfy animals .
Your Creator is “ the God of love , ” “ the happy God , ” who made humans “ in his image . ”
You will be happy when you imitate our loving God .
Have you ever experienced the truth of the scripture that says : “ There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving ” ?
That is a basic truth about human life .

Therefore , Jehovah desires that your plans focus on demonstrating love for others and for God . ​ — Read Matthew 22 : 36 - 39 .
4 , 5 .
What made Jesus happy ?
Jesus Christ set the perfect example for you young ones .
As a child , he no doubt played and had fun .
God’s Word says that there is “ a time to laugh . . . and a time to dance . ”
Jesus also drew close to Jehovah by studying the Scriptures .
When he was 12 years old , the teachers at the temple were amazed at “ his understanding and his answers ” regarding spiritual matters . ​ — Luke 2 : 42 , 46 , 47 .
Jesus grew up to be a happy adult . What made him happy ?
He knew that , among other things , God wanted him “ to declare good news to the poor . . . and a recovery of sight to the blind . ”
Doing what God asked him to do made Jesus happy . Psalm 40 : 8 expresses his feelings : “ To do your will , O my God , is my delight . ”
Jesus enjoyed teaching people about his heavenly Father .
( Read Luke 10 : 21 . )
Once , after teaching a woman about true worship , Jesus said to his disciples : “ My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work . ”
Showing love for God and for others made Jesus happy .
It can make you happy too .
Why is it worth discussing your plans for the future with experienced Christians ?
Many Christians experienced happiness in their youth by serving as pioneers .
Why not discuss your plans with some of them ? “ Plans fail when there is no consultation , but there is accomplishment through many advisers . ”
Such spiritual people may tell you that the full - time ministry provides an education that benefits you throughout life .
After having been instructed by his Father in heaven , Jesus continued to learn during his earthly ministry .
For example , he learned the joy of reaching hearts with the good news and also the joy of keeping integrity under test .
( Read Isaiah 50 : 4 ; Heb .
5 : 8 ; 12 : 2 ) Let us consider some aspects of full - time service that could make you very happy .
Why do many young people enjoy making disciples ?
Jesus said : “ Go . . . make disciples of people . . . teaching them . ”
If you plan to be a disciple - maker , you will be choosing a most satisfying career , one that glorifies God .
As with any career , you need time to become skilled .
Recently , a brother named Timothy who started pioneering as a teenager said : “ I like serving Jehovah full - time because it’s the way I express my love for him .
At first , I couldn’t start any Bible studies , but later I moved to another territory , and within a month I started several studies .
One student began coming to the Kingdom Hall .
After I attended the two - month Bible School for Single Brothers , * I received a new assignment where I have started four studies .

I love teaching people , as I can see that holy spirit is changing them . ” ​ — 1 Thess .
2 : 19 .
How have some young Christians shared more fully in making disciples ?
Some young Christians have learned another language .
For example , Jacob , from North America , writes : “ When I was seven , many of my classmates were Vietnamese .
I wanted to tell them about Jehovah , so after a while I made plans to learn their language .
For the most part , I learned by comparing the English and Vietnamese editions of The Watchtower .
I also made friends in a nearby Vietnamese - language congregation .
When I was 18 , I started pioneering .
Later , I attended the Bible School for Single Brothers .
This helped me with my present pioneer assignment , where I am the only elder in a Vietnamese - language group .
Many Vietnamese people are amazed that I have learned their language .
They invite me in , and often I can study the Bible with them .
Some have progressed to baptism . ” ​ — Compare Acts 2 : 7 , 8 .
How does the disciple - making work provide a fine education ?
Disciple - making is an educational experience that teaches you good work habits , communication skills , confidence , and tact .
But making disciples is especially joyful because it helps you to become more familiar with the Scriptural basis for your faith .
You also learn how to work closely with Jehovah . ​ — 1 Cor .
3 : 9 .
How can you share in the joy of making disciples even in a challenging territory ?
You can enjoy making disciples even if few people in your territory respond to the good news .
Making disciples is teamwork .
The whole congregation searches for sincere ones .
Although only one brother or sister may find the person who eventually becomes a disciple , all shared in the search and all can share in the joy .
For example , Brandon spent nine years pioneering in unresponsive territory . He says : “ I like preaching the good news because it is what Jehovah asks us to do .
I started pioneering soon after finishing school .
I enjoy encouraging the young brothers in our congregation and seeing their spiritual progress .
After I attended the Bible School for Single Brothers , I received a new pioneer assignment .
It’s true that I have never found anyone in the territory who progressed to baptism , but others have .
I’m glad I planned to share fully in the disciple - making work . ” ​ — Eccl .
11 : 6 .
What form of sacred service have many young people enjoyed ?
There are many opportunities to serve Jehovah .
For example , many young people share in volunteer construction work .
Hundreds of new Kingdom Halls are needed .
Building them is sacred service that glorifies God and can make you happy .
As in other forms of sacred service , the association with fellow workers is a joy .
Theocratic construction work is also educational , as it teaches you to be safety conscious , to be a diligent worker , and to cooperate with those in oversight .
Many blessings await those who enter the full - time service ( See paragraphs 11 - 13 )
How may pioneer service lead to other opportunities ?
A brother named Kevin says : “ Ever since I was a little boy , I have wanted to serve Jehovah full - time someday .
Finally , I started pioneering when I was 19 .
I supported myself working part - time for a brother who was a builder .
I learned to install roofs , windows , and doors .
Later , I spent two years with a hurricane relief team , rebuilding Kingdom Halls and homes for the brothers .
When I heard about the construction needs in South Africa , I applied and was invited to go .
Here in Africa , I move from one Kingdom Hall project to another every few weeks .
My construction group is like a family .
We live together , study the Bible together , and work together . I also enjoy preaching with the local brothers each week .
The plans I made as a boy have made me happy in ways I did not foresee . ”
How does Bethel service make young ones happy ?
Some who acted on their plans to serve Jehovah full - time are now at Bethel .
Bethel service is a happy way of life because everything you do there is for Jehovah .
The Bethel family helps to provide spiritual food .
A Bethelite named Dustin reports : “ I made full - time service my goal when I was nine years old , and I started pioneering when I finished school .
After a year and a half , I was invited to Bethel , where I learned to operate printing presses and later to do computer programming .
At Bethel , I enjoy hearing firsthand about the progress of the disciple - making activity worldwide .

I love serving here because what we do helps people to draw close to Jehovah . ”
How can you make plans to enter the full - time ministry ?
How can you plan to be a full - time Christian minister ?
More than anything , spiritual qualities will help you to be successful in serving Jehovah fully .
So be diligent in your study of God’s Word , meditate deeply on its meaning , and look for ways to express your faith at congregation meetings .
During your school years , you can acquire experience and skill as a preacher of the good news .
Learn to be interested in people by tactfully asking their opinion and listening to their response .
Also , you can offer to do things in the congregation , such as helping to clean and maintain the Kingdom Hall . Jehovah is pleased to use those who have a humble , willing spirit .
( Read Psalm 110 : 3 ; Acts 6 : 1 - 3 ) The apostle Paul invited Timothy into missionary service because “ he was well - reported - on by the brothers . ” ​ — Acts 16 : 1 - 5 .
How can you prepare to earn a living ? Full - time ministers generally need to earn a living .
Perhaps a short school course will qualify you for part - time work that is in demand locally .
As you make plans , consult your circuit overseer and the pioneers in your circuit . Ask them what work is practical for pioneers .
And , as the Bible says , “ commit to Jehovah whatever you do , and your plans will succeed . ” ​ — Prov .
16 : 3 ; 20 : 18 .
How can serving Jehovah fully in your youth prepare you for other responsibilities in the future ?
You can be sure that Jehovah wants you to “ get a firm hold ” on a happy future .
( Read 1 Timothy 6 : 18 , 19 . )
Full - time service brings you into contact with fellow full - time servants and helps you to mature as a Christian . Many have found that serving Jehovah fully during youth also helped them to have a more successful marriage .
Often , those who pioneered before marriage have been able to continue in that service together as a married couple . ​ — Rom .
16 : 3 , 4 .
17 , 18 .
How does making plans involve your heart ?
Planning involves your heart .
Psalm 20 : 4 says of Jehovah : “ May he grant you the desires of your heart and give success to all your plans . ”
So think about what you want to do with your life .
Consider what Jehovah is doing in our time and how you can have a share in his service . Then plan to do what is pleasing to him .
Serving Jehovah fully will bring you deep satisfaction because it is the way of life that honors God .
Yes , “ find exquisite delight in Jehovah , and he will grant you the desires of your heart . ” ​ — Ps .
37 : 4 .
Replaced by the School for Kingdom Evangelizers .
YOU are under attack !

And your chief enemy , Satan , is using a very dangerous weapon against you .
What is it ?
Propaganda !
A weapon specially designed to attack , not your body , but your mind .
The apostle Paul was alert to the danger that satanic propaganda posed , but not all his fellow Christians were .
Some in Corinth , for example , had apparently become overconfident ​ — thinking that they were so strong in the truth that they could never fall .
That is why Paul gave this warning : “ I am afraid that somehow , as the serpent seduced Eve by its cunning , your minds might be corrupted away from the sincerity and the chastity that are due the Christ . ” ​ — 2 Cor .
11 : 3 .
Paul’s deep concern shows that there is no room for complacency .
If you are going to win the battle for your mind , you must recognize the danger that propaganda poses and protect yourself from it .
What is propaganda ?
In this context , it is the use of biased or misleading information to manipulate the way people think and act .
Some equate propaganda with “ lies , distortion , deceit , manipulation , mind control , [ and ] psychological warfare ” and associate it with “ unethical , harmful , and unfair tactics . ” ​ — Propaganda and Persuasion .
How dangerous is propaganda ?

It is insidious ​ — like an invisible , odorless , poisonous gas — ​ and it seeps into our consciousness .
Because we may not see propaganda for what it is , behavior specialist Vance Packard observed : “ Many of us are being influenced and manipulated ​ — far more than we realize . ”
Under its influence , says one scholar , men and women have been “ quite easily led into the most preposterously dangerous behaviour ” ​ — such as ‘ genocide , war , racist hysteria , religious intolerance and many other forms of irrational behaviour . ’ ​ — Easily Led — ​ A History of Propaganda .
Now if mere men can fool us with their propaganda , what might Satan be able to do ?
He has studied human behavior since man was created .
“ The whole world ” now lies in his power . He can use any part of it to disseminate his lies .
So effective has Satan been in ‘ blinding people’s minds ’ that he now ‘ misleads the entire inhabited earth . ’
How can you resist his propaganda ?
Jesus gave this simple rule for combating propaganda : “ Know the truth , and the truth will set you free . ”
But since truth is often the first casualty of war , you ​ — like any other soldier in the heat of battle — ​ need a source of trustworthy , reliable information to prevent the enemy from playing tricks with your mind .
Jehovah has provided this .
In the pages of the Bible , you can find all you need to combat Satan’s propaganda . ​ — 2 Tim .
3 : 16 , 17 .
Of course , the great propagandist , Satan , knows this .
So he uses his system of things to discourage Bible reading and study .
Do not fall for his devious schemes !
Become “ thoroughly able to comprehend ” the full scope of the truth .
That will take real effort on your part .
But remember this basic fact expressed by author Noam Chomsky : “ Nobody is going to pour truth into your brain .
It’s something you have to find out for yourself . ”
So “ find out for yourself ” by being diligent in “ carefully examining the Scriptures daily . ” ​ — Acts 17 : 11 .
To win the battle for your mind , you must recognize the danger that propaganda poses and protect yourself from it
Keep in mind that Satan does not want you to think clearly or reason things out well .
Why ? Because propaganda “ is likely to be most effective , ” says one source , “ if people . . . are discouraged from thinking critically . ”
( Media and Society in the Twentieth Century ) So never be content passively or blindly to accept what you hear .
Use your God - given thinking abilities and power of reason to make the truth your own . ​ — Prov .
2 : 10 - 15 ; Rom .
12 : 1 , 2 .
Military strategists may use propaganda to undermine morale and weaken the fighting spirit .
They may induce enemy soldiers to fight among themselves or fool them into isolating themselves from the main fighting force .
A German general , it has been said , admitted that one reason for defeat in World War I was that the people “ were hypnotized by the enemy propaganda as a rabbit is by a snake . ”
Satan uses similar tricks in his attempts to divide and conquer , trying , for example , to stir up contentions among Christian brothers and sisters or to induce them to isolate themselves from Jehovah’s organization because of some perceived injustice or grievance .
Do not be deceived !
Let God’s Word guide you .
For example , in the matter of maintaining unity with your brothers and sisters , the Bible encourages you to continue “ forgiving one another freely ” and to be quick to resolve matters of dispute .
It strongly warns us against isolating ourselves from the congregation .

Test your defenses against satanic propaganda .

Ask yourself : ‘ What governed my thinking the last time I faced such a situation ?
Was it the world’s spirit or God’s spirit ? ’ ​ — Gal .
5 : 16 - 26 ; Eph .
2 : 2 , 3 .
A soldier whose loyalty to his leader is weakened will not fight well .
So propagandists attempt to break bonds of confidence and trust between a soldier and his commander . They may use such propaganda as : “ You cannot trust your leaders ! ”
and “ Do not let them lead you into disaster ! ”
To add weight to these attacks , they may cleverly exploit any mistakes those leaders might make .
Satan does this .
He never gives up trying to undermine your confidence in the leadership that Jehovah has provided .
Your defense ?
Be determined to stick to Jehovah’s organization and loyally support the leadership he provides ​ — no matter what imperfections may surface .
Do not be “ quickly shaken from your reason ” when faced with what appear to be damaging attacks by apostates or other such deceivers of the mind ​ — however plausible their charges may seem .
Follow the advice given to the young man Timothy .

Stick to the truth you learned , and remember where you learned it .

Surely there is ample evidence to show that you can trust the channel that Jehovah has used for nearly a hundred years now to lead us in the way of the truth . ​ — Matt .
24 : 45 - 47 ; Heb .
13 : 7 , 17 .
Keep in mind , though , that Satan’s propaganda is not always subtle .
At times , he uses terror tactics ​ — “ one of the oldest of all forms of propaganda . ”
( Easily Led ​ — A History of Propaganda ) The Assyrians , for example , dominated their enemies with “ a policy of terror coupled with one of propaganda , ” wrote British Professor Philip M .
Taylor .
Satan will use fear of man , fear of persecution , fear of death , and any other kind of negative fear to try to dominate you and make you shrink back from serving Jehovah . ​ — Isa .
8 : 12 ; Jer .
42 : 11 ; Heb .
2 : 15 .
Do not let Satan use fear itself to weaken your morale or break your integrity .
Jesus said : “ Do not fear those who kill the body and after this are not able to do anything more . ”
Have complete confidence in Jehovah’s promise to watch over you , to give you “ the power beyond what is normal , ” and to help you withstand any attempts to frighten you into submission . ​ — 2 Cor .
4 : 7 - 9 ; 1 Pet . 3 : 14 .
You may , of course , encounter frightening , morale - weakening events .
But keep in mind Jehovah’s words of encouragement to Joshua : “ Be courageous and strong .
Do not be struck with terror or fear , for Jehovah your God is with you wherever you go . ”
If anxiety strikes , go immediately to Jehovah in prayer with all your concerns . You can be sure that “ the peace of God . . . will guard your hearts and your mental powers ” so that you will have the strength to resist all of Satan’s propaganda . ​ — Phil .
4 : 6 , 7 , 13 .
Do you remember the propaganda used by the Assyrian envoy , the Rabshakeh , against God’s people ?
He said , in effect , ‘ Nothing can protect you from Assyria .
Even your God , Jehovah , can do nothing for you . ’
He boldly added : ‘ Jehovah himself told us to destroy this land . ’
What did Jehovah say in return ?
“ Do not be afraid because of the words that you heard , . . . with which the attendants of the king of Assyria blasphemed me . ”
He then sent an angel who destroyed 185,000 Assyrians in one night ! ​ — 2 Ki . 19 : 35 .
Have you ever watched a film in which , from your vantage point in the audience , you can clearly see that someone is being deceived and manipulated ?
Did you find yourself thinking : ‘ Do not believe it !
They are lying to you ! ’
Imagine , then , the angels shouting the same message to you : “ Do not be fooled by Satan’s lies ! ”
Shut your ears , then , to Satan’s propaganda .
Listen to Jehovah and trust in him in all that you do .
Respond to his loving appeal : “ Be wise , my son , and make my heart rejoice . ”
Then , you will win the battle for your mind !
3 Are You Willing to Wait Patiently ?
8 “ The Peace of God . . .
Surpasses All Understanding ”
The first article explains why we should be willing to wait on Jehovah .
We will also consider how the examples of faithful men and women of old can help us learn to wait patiently .
The second article highlights how Jehovah can do the unexpected by accomplishing things we could never imagine .
This will strengthen our trust in him as we wait patiently for him to act in our behalf .
13 Life Story ​ — Endurance Under Trial Results in Blessings
17 How We Strip Off and Keep Off the Old Personality
22 How We Put On and Keep On the New Personality
The first article explains what it means to strip off the old personality and why doing so is urgent .
It also discusses what we can do to keep off the old personality .
The second article considers several qualities that are part of the new personality and explains how we can demonstrate these in our life and ministry .
27 Love ​ — A Precious Quality
30 From Our Archives
32 Questions From Readers
“ You too exercise patience . ” ​ — JAS .
5 : 8 .
SONGS : 114 , 79
What is involved in being patient ?
What helped men and women of old to be willing to wait on Jehovah ?
How have both Jehovah and Jesus shown a willingness to wait ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What may cause us to ask : “ How long ” ?
( b ) Why can we be encouraged by the examples of faithful servants in the past ?
“ HOW long ? ”
That was the question raised by the faithful prophets Isaiah and Habakkuk .
When composing Psalm 13 , King David four times likewise asked : “ How long ? ”
Even our Lord Jesus Christ asked this question when confronted with the faithless attitude of those around him .
So we should not be surprised if we find ourselves at times asking the very same question .
What can cause us to ask : “ How long ” ?
Perhaps we have had to deal with some form of injustice .
Or maybe we are enduring old age and sickness or the pressures of living in these “ critical times ” that are so “ hard to deal with . ”
Or maybe the wrong attitudes of those around us are wearing us out .
Whatever the cause , how encouraging it is to know that Jehovah’s faithful servants in the past felt free to express the same question that may loom in our minds , and they were not condemned for asking it !
What can help us when we face difficult circumstances ?
But what can help us when we come face - to - face with such difficult circumstances ?
The disciple James , Jesus ’ half brother , was inspired to tell us : “ Be patient then , brothers , until the presence of the Lord . ”
Yes , we all need patience .
But what is involved in having this godly quality ?
4 , 5 . ( a ) What is involved in being patient ?
( b ) How does the disciple James illustrate one aspect of patience ?
( See opening picture . )

According to the Bible , patience is a product of holy spirit ; without God’s help , imperfect humans cannot be patient to the degree needed .
Patience is a gift from God , and being patient is a key way to show our love for him .
Patience is also an expression of our love for others .
Persistent impatience weakens the bonds of love ; patience strengthens them .
Patience involves a number of other vital Christian qualities .
For example , it is closely connected with endurance , which enables us to put up with difficult circumstances while maintaining a positive attitude .
Patience can also involve suffering without retaliating and remaining firm and steadfast no matter what may come our way .
Additionally , the Bible urges us to accept willingly the need to wait .
This aspect of patience is highlighted at James 5 : 7 , 8 .
( Read . )
Why must we be willing to accept the need to wait for Jehovah to act ?
James compares our situation to that of a farmer .
Even though a farmer works hard to plant his crop , he has no control over the weather or the growth of the plants . He cannot speed up the time .
He accepts that he needs to wait patiently for “ the precious fruit of the earth . ”
In a similar manner , there are many factors that are beyond our control as we wait for the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises .
Like the farmer , we need to wait patiently .
What can we learn from the example of the prophet Micah ?
The conditions we face today are similar to those in the days of the prophet Micah .
He lived during the reign of wicked King Ahaz , a time when all sorts of corruption prevailed .
In fact , the people had become “ expert at doing what is bad . ”
( Read Micah 7 : 1 - 3 . )
Micah realized that he could not personally change these conditions .
So , what could he do ?
He tells us : “ As for me , I will keep on the lookout for Jehovah .
I will show a waiting attitude [ “ I will wait patiently , ” ftn . ] for the God of my salvation .
My God will hear me . ”
Like Micah , we too need to have “ a waiting attitude . ”
Why is more required of us than just waiting for Jehovah to fulfill his promises ?
If we have faith like that of Micah , we will be willing to wait for Jehovah .
Our situation is not like that of a prisoner who is waiting in his cell for his execution .
He is forced to wait , and he is not looking forward to the outcome . How different things are for us !
We are willing to wait for Jehovah because we know that he will fulfill his promise to give us everlasting life at exactly the right time , the best time !
So we “ endure fully with patience and joy . ”
To do otherwise ​ — to wait while complaining and grumbling that Jehovah is not acting fast enough — ​ would be displeasing to our God . ​ — Col .
3 : 12 .
What do we need to remember as we meditate on the examples of faithful men and women of old ?
We will be more willing to wait if we remember faithful men and women of old who waited patiently for Jehovah to fulfill his promises .
As we meditate on their examples , it is good for us to remember how long they had to wait , why they were willing to wait , and what blessings resulted from their patience .
Abraham had to wait many years before his grandsons Esau and Jacob were born ( See paragraphs 9 , 10 )
9 , 10 .
How long did Abraham and Sarah have to wait on Jehovah ?
Consider the example of Abraham and Sarah .
They are among “ those who through faith and patience inherit the promises . ”
The Scriptures tell us that “ after Abraham had shown patience , ” he obtained the promise that Jehovah would bless him and multiply his offspring .
Why did Abraham need to show patience ?
Simply stated , the fulfillment of the promise would take time .
The covenant Jehovah made with Abraham started to take effect on Nisan 14 , 1943 B.C.E .
That was when he and Sarah along with their household crossed the Euphrates River and entered the Promised Land .
Abraham then had to wait 25 years before his son Isaac was born in 1918 B.C.E . , and he had to wait another 60 years before his grandsons Esau and Jacob were born in 1858 B.C.E . ​ — Heb .
11 : 9 .
How much land did Abraham inherit ?

We are told : “ Yet , he [ Jehovah ] did not give him [ Abraham ] any inheritance in it , no , not even enough to put his foot on ; but he promised to give it to him as a possession and after him to his offspring , though as yet he had no child . ”
It was not until 430 years after Abraham had crossed the Euphrates that his descendants were organized into a nation that would take possession of the land . ​ — Ex .
12 : 40 - 42 ; Gal .
3 : 17 .
Why was Abraham willing to wait on Jehovah , and what blessings will he see as a result of his patience ?
Abraham was willing to wait , because his patience was based on his faith in Jehovah .
( Read Hebrews 11 : 8 - 12 . )
Abraham was happy to wait , even though he did not see the complete fulfillment of the promise in his day .
But just imagine Abraham’s joy when he is resurrected back to a paradise earth .
He will be surprised to see how much of the Bible was used to record his personal story and that of his descendants .
* Just imagine how thrilled he will be to understand for the first time his vital role in the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose with regard to the promised offspring !
No doubt , he will feel that the long wait was worth it .
12 , 13 .
Why did Joseph need patience , and what fine attitude did he have ?
Abraham’s great - grandson Joseph also showed a willingness to be patient .
He was the victim of some outrageous injustices .
First , his brothers sold him into slavery when he was about 17 years old .
Then , he was falsely accused of trying to rape his master’s wife and ended up in irons in prison .
For his righteous actions , he seemed to be punished rather than blessed .
But after 13 years , everything changed very quickly .
He was released from prison and promoted to the second - highest position in Egypt . ​ — Gen .
41 : 14 , 37 - 43 ; Acts 7 : 9 , 10 .
Did the injustices make Joseph bitter ?
Did he lose confidence in his God , Jehovah ?
No .
What helped Joseph to wait patiently ?
It was his faith in Jehovah .
He saw Jehovah’s hand in matters .
Notice how this is reflected in what he told his brothers : “ Do not be afraid .
Am I in the place of God ?
Although you meant to harm me , God intended it to turn out well and to preserve many people alive , as he is doing today . ”
Ultimately , Joseph realized that the wait was worth it .
14 , 15 . ( a ) What is outstanding about David’s patience ?
( b ) What helped David to wait patiently ?
King David was also the victim of many injustices .
Although anointed by Jehovah at an early age to be the future king of Israel , David had to wait some 15 years before he was made king over his own tribe .
During part of this time , unfaithful King Saul pursued David , seeking to kill him .
* As a result , David had to live as a fugitive , at times in a foreign country and at other times in caves in the wilderness .
Even when Saul was eventually killed in battle , David still had to wait about seven more years before he was given the kingship over the whole nation of Israel . ​ — 2 Sam .
5 : 4 , 5 .
Why was David willing to wait patiently ?
He gives us the answer in the very psalm in which he four times asked : “ How long ? ”
This is what he says : “ As for me , I trust in your loyal love ; my heart will rejoice in your acts of salvation .
I will sing to Jehovah , for he has richly rewarded me . ”
David trusted in Jehovah’s loyal love .
He joyfully looked forward to deliverance , and he reflected on how Jehovah had dealt rewardingly with him .

Yes , David felt that the wait would be worth it .
With regard to exercising patience , Jehovah does not expect us to do something that he is not willing to do himself
16 , 17 .
How have both Jehovah God and Jesus Christ set excellent examples with regard to being willing to wait ?
With regard to exercising patience , Jehovah does not expect us to do something that he is not willing to do himself .
He has set the supreme example of being willing to wait .
( Read 2 Peter 3 : 9 . )
Jehovah has been waiting patiently for thousands of years so that the moral issues raised in the garden of Eden could eventually be settled beyond a doubt .
He is “ waiting patiently ” and “ keeping in expectation ” of the time when his name will be fully sanctified .
This will result in unimaginable blessings for those who are “ eagerly waiting for him . ” ​ — Isa . 30 : 18 ; ftn .
Jesus likewise has been willing to wait .
Although he passed the test of integrity here on earth and presented the value of his ransom sacrifice in 33 C.E . , he had to wait until 1914 before commencing his rule .
It will not be until the end of his Thousand Year Reign that all his enemies will be completely destroyed .
It will have been a long wait , but we can be sure that the wait will be worth it .
18 , 19 .
What will help us to be willing to wait patiently ?
Without a doubt , therefore , each one of us needs to be willing to wait , to show a patient attitude .
But what will help us to do this ?

Pray for God’s spirit .
Remember , patience is an aspect of the fruitage of the spirit .
Plead with Jehovah to help you to endure patiently .
Remember , too , what helped Abraham , Joseph , and David to wait patiently for the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises .
It was their faith in Jehovah and their trust in his dealings with them .
They did not focus just on themselves and their personal comfort .
As we contemplate how well things worked out for them , we too will be encouraged to show a waiting attitude .
What should be our personal determination ?
So even though we face tests and trials , we are determined to show “ a waiting attitude . ”
Yes , at times we might cry out : “ How long , O Jehovah ? ”
But with the strengthening power of God’s holy spirit , each of us is determined to echo the words of Jeremiah : “ Jehovah is my share . . . That is why I will show a waiting attitude for him . ” ​ — Lam .
3 : 21 , 24 .
Some 15 chapters of the book of Genesis are devoted to the account about Abraham .
Additionally , the writers of the Christian Greek Scriptures refer to Abraham more than 70 times .
Although Saul was rejected by Jehovah after ruling a little over two years , he was allowed to continue ruling for 38 more years , until his death . ​ — 1 Sam .
13 : 1 ; Acts 13 : 21 .
“ The peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts . ” ​ — PHIL .
4 : 7 .
SONGS : 112 , 58
What lessons do we learn from what happened to the apostle Paul in Philippi ?
What Scriptural examples prove that Jehovah can do the unexpected ?
How can we with full confidence retain “ the peace of God ” ?
1 , 2 .
What events in Philippi led to the imprisonment of Paul and Silas ?
( See opening picture . )
IT IS about midnight .
Two missionaries , Paul and Silas , are in prison ​ — the innermost part of the prison — ​ in the city of Philippi .
Their feet are fastened securely in stocks , and their backs are still aching from the beatings they had just received .
How quickly things had happened !
Without any warning , they had been dragged by a mob to the marketplace to stand before a hastily convened court .
Their clothes were torn off them , and they were severely beaten with rods .
The injustice of it all !
Paul , a Roman citizen , deserved a proper trial .

*
As Paul sits in the darkness , he contemplates the events of the day .
He thinks about the people of Philippi .
They do not even have a Jewish synagogue in their city , unlike so many other cities that Paul has visited .
In fact , the Jewish worshippers need to gather outside the city gates beside a river .
Is this because there are not even ten Jewish males in the city , the number required to form a synagogue ?
The people of Philippi are obviously very proud of their Roman citizenship , even if it is only a partial or secondary form of citizenship .
Could this be why they do not even think it possible that these Jews , Paul and Silas , could be Roman citizens ?
Whatever the case , here they are , unjustly thrown into prison .
Why may Paul have found his imprisonment confusing ; yet , what attitude did he display ?
Perhaps Paul is also thinking about the events of the past few months .
He was on the other side of the Aegean Sea , in Asia Minor .
While Paul was there , the holy spirit repeatedly stopped him from preaching in certain areas .
It was as if the holy spirit were pushing him to go somewhere else . But where ?
The answer came in a vision while he was in Troas .
Paul was told : “ Step over into Macedonia . ”
With such a clear indication of Jehovah’s will , Paul immediately accepted the invitation .
( Read Acts 16 : 8 - 10 . )
But what happened next ?
Soon after he arrived in Macedonia , he ended up in prison !
Why did Jehovah allow this to happen to Paul ?
How long would he be stuck in prison ?
Even if these questions weighed heavily on Paul’s mind , he did not let them erode his faith and joy .
Both he and Silas started “ praying and praising God with song . ”
Their hearts and minds were soothed by the peace of God .
4 , 5 . ( a ) How could our situation be similar to that of Paul ?
( b ) How did Paul’s situation change unexpectedly ?
Perhaps there have been times in your life when you felt that you , like Paul , were following the leadings of God’s holy spirit , but then things did not turn out the way you expected .
You came face - to - face with challenges , or you found yourself in new circumstances that required massive changes in your life .
As you look back , maybe you are left wondering why Jehovah allowed certain things to happen .
If so , what can help you to continue to endure with full confidence in Jehovah ?
To find the answer , let us return to the account of Paul and Silas .
As Paul and Silas sing songs of praise , a series of totally unexpected events occurs .
Suddenly , there is a violent earthquake . The doors of the prison are thrown wide open .
All the prisoners ’ bonds are loosened . Paul stops the jailer from committing suicide .
The jailer and his entire family get baptized .
As the new day starts , the city magistrates send constables to release Paul and Silas . The officials ask them to leave the city peacefully .
Then , on realizing that Paul and Silas are Roman citizens , the magistrates see that they have made a huge blunder , so they themselves come to escort the two men out .
But Paul and Silas insist on first saying good - bye to their newly baptized sister Lydia . Additionally , they use the opportunity to strengthen the brothers .
How quickly everything changed !
What will we now discuss and review together ?
What do we learn from these events ?
Jehovah can do the unexpected , so we need not be anxious in the face of trials .
That lesson no doubt made a deep impression on Paul , as evidenced by what he later wrote to the brothers in Philippi about anxiety and the peace of God .
Let us first discuss Paul’s words recorded at Philippians 4 : 6 , 7 .
( Read . )
Then , we will review some additional Scriptural examples of how Jehovah did the unexpected .
Finally , we will consider how “ the peace of God ” can help us to endure with full confidence in Jehovah .
What lesson did Paul highlight when he later wrote to the brothers in Philippi , and what lesson can we learn from his words ?
No doubt when the brothers in Philippi read Paul’s letter to them , they remembered what had happened to him and how none of them had expected Jehovah to take action in the way that he did .
What lesson was Paul teaching them ?
Basically : Do not worry .
Pray , and then you will receive the peace of God .
But notice that “ the peace of God . . . surpasses all understanding . ”
What does that mean ?
Some translators render this expression “ surpasses all our dreams ” or “ excels all human planning . ”
Paul was , in effect , saying that “ the peace of God ” is more wonderful than can be imagined .
So although from a human viewpoint we may not see a way out of our problems , Jehovah does , and he can do the unexpected . ​ — Read 2 Peter 2 : 9 .
8 , 9 . ( a ) Even though Paul had suffered an injustice in Philippi , what good resulted because of those events ?
( b ) Why could the brothers in Philippi take Paul’s words seriously ?
As the brothers in Philippi thought over what had happened in the ten years since those events , they would have been strengthened .
What Paul wrote was true . Although Jehovah had allowed an injustice to occur , this ultimately resulted in “ the defending and legally establishing of the good news . ”
Those city magistrates would think twice before doing anything against the newly formed Christian congregation in their city .
Perhaps because of Paul’s actions , his traveling companion Luke , the physician , was able to remain in Philippi after Paul and Silas left .
Luke could thus give extra help to the new Christians in that city .
Indeed , when those brothers in Philippi read Paul’s letter , they knew that these were not the words of an academic who was sitting somewhere in an office .
Paul had experienced extreme difficulties ; yet , he demonstrated that he had “ the peace of God . ” In fact , when Paul wrote to those brothers , he was under house arrest in Rome . But he was still showing that “ the peace of God ” was with him . ​ — Phil .
1 : 12 - 14 ; 4 : 7 , 11 , 22 .
10 , 11 .
What do we need to do when we are overly worried about a problem , and what can we reasonably expect ?
What can help us not to be anxious over anything and to experience “ the peace of God ” ?
Paul’s words to the Philippians show us that the antidote to worry is prayer .
So when we are anxious , we need to turn our worries into prayers .
( Read 1 Peter 5 : 6 , 7 . )
Pray to Jehovah in full faith , knowing that he cares for you .
Pray to him “ with thanksgiving , ” remembering your blessings .
Our confidence in him will be strengthened when we keep in mind that he can “ do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive . ” ​ — Eph .
3 : 20 .
As in the case of Paul and Silas in Philippi , we may be surprised by what Jehovah does for us personally .
It may not be spectacular , but it will always be what we need .
Of course , this does not mean that we sit back and do nothing , simply waiting for Jehovah to correct the situation or solve the problem .
We need to act in harmony with our prayers .
Our actions thereby prove our sincerity and give Jehovah something to bless .
But at the same time , we need to realize that Jehovah is not limited by our requests , plans , and expectations .
Sometimes he surprises us by doing the unexpected .
Let us consider some Bible accounts that reinforce our confidence in Jehovah’s ability to do the unexpected in our behalf .
( a ) What did King Hezekiah do when threatened by Assyrian King Sennacherib ?
( b ) What do we learn from how Jehovah resolved the problem ?
As we search the Scriptures , time and again we find examples of Jehovah doing the unexpected .
King Hezekiah lived at a time when King Sennacherib of Assyria invaded Judah and captured all the fortified cities , with the exception of Jerusalem .
Then , Sennacherib turned his attention to Jerusalem . What did King Hezekiah do when faced with this imminent threat ?
He approached Jehovah in prayer and turned to Jehovah’s prophet Isaiah for advice .
Hezekiah also tried to show his reasonableness by paying the fine that Sennacherib imposed on him .
In time , Hezekiah made preparations for a long siege .
But how was the situation resolved ? Jehovah sent an angel to destroy 185,000 of Sennacherib’s soldiers in one night .
Truly , not even Hezekiah expected that to happen ! ​ — 2 Ki .
19 : 35 .


What lesson do we learn from what happened to Joseph ? ​ — Gen .
41 : 42 ( See paragraph 13 )
( a ) What lesson do we learn from what happened to Joseph ?
( b ) How did something unexpected occur in the case of Abraham’s wife , Sarah ?
Consider the young man Joseph , a son of Jacob .
While in a prison hole in Egypt , did Joseph have any idea that he would be appointed to the second - highest position in the land or that he would be used by Jehovah to save his family from starvation ?
No doubt Jehovah’s actions exceeded all of Joseph’s expectations .
Think , too , about Joseph’s great - grandmother Sarah .
Did aged Sarah expect that Jehovah would allow her to give birth to her own son , not just receive as son the child produced by her servant girl ?
The birth of Isaac certainly exceeded all that Sarah could ever have imagined . ​ — Gen .
21 : 1 - 3 , 6 , 7 .
What confidence can we have in Jehovah ?
Granted , we do not expect that Jehovah will miraculously take away all our problems before the promised new world ; nor do we demand that spectacular things occur in our lives .
But we do know that the God who helped his servants in amazing ways is our God , Jehovah .
( Read Isaiah 43 : 10 - 13 . )
This confidence helps us to have faith in him .
We know that he can do whatever is needed to empower us to accomplish his will fully .
What lessons do we learn from these Bible accounts ?
As the examples of Hezekiah , Joseph , and Sarah show , Jehovah can help us to conquer the seemingly unconquerable if we remain faithful to Him .
Jehovah can help us to conquer the seemingly unconquerable if we remain faithful to him
What will help us to retain “ the peace of God , ” and how is this possible ?
How can we face challenges and still retain “ the peace of God ” ?
It is by maintaining a good relationship with our God , Jehovah .
Such a relationship is possible only “ by means of Christ Jesus , ” who offered his life as a ransom sacrifice .
The provision of that ransom is yet another one of the amazing works of our Father .
Jehovah uses the ransom to cover our sins , enabling us to have a clean conscience and draw close to him . ​ — John 14 : 6 ; Jas . 4 : 8 ; 1 Pet .
3 : 21 .
What will result when we attain “ the peace of God ” ?
Illustrate .
What results when we receive this “ peace of God that surpasses all understanding ” ?
The Scriptures answer by saying that it ‘ will guard our hearts and our mental powers by means of Christ Jesus . ’
The original - language word for “ guard ” was a military expression .
It referred to a garrison of troops that was assigned to guard a fortified city in ancient times .
Philippi was such a city .
The inhabitants of Philippi slept soundly at night , knowing that soldiers were guarding the gates of their city .
In a similar manner , when we have “ the peace of God , ” our hearts and minds remain at rest .
We know that Jehovah cares for us and wants us to succeed .
That knowledge guards us from becoming overwhelmed by anxiety or discouragement . What will help us to face the future with full confidence ?
Soon mankind will face the greatest tribulation that will ever occur here on earth .
We do not know all the details of what that will mean for us individually .
However , there is no need for us to be consumed by anxiety .
Even though we do not know everything Jehovah will do , we do know our God .
We have seen from his past dealings that no matter what happens , Jehovah will always accomplish his purpose , and sometimes he does it in an unexpected manner .
Each time Jehovah does so for us , we may experience in a new way “ the peace of God that surpasses all understanding . ”
Apparently , Silas too was a Roman citizen . ​ — Acts 16 : 37 .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
Two pioneers in Amsterdam share the Kingdom message with a passerby
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
LIFE STORY
As told by Pavel Sivulsky
“ YOU are such a cruel father , ” scolded the KGB officer .
* “ You’ve abandoned your pregnant wife and baby daughter .
Who will feed them and care for them ?
Renounce your activities and go home ! ”
I replied : “ No , I didn’t abandon my family . You arrested me ! And for what ? ”
The officer retorted : “ Any crime other than being a Witness is better . ” That exchange took place in 1959 in a prison in the city of Irkutsk in Russia .
Allow me to relate why my wife , Maria , and I were prepared to “ suffer for the sake of righteousness ” and how we were blessed for remaining faithful . ​ — 1 Pet .
3 : 13 , 14 .
I was born in Ukraine in 1933 in the village of Zolotniki .
In 1937 my aunt and her husband , who were Witnesses , visited us from France and left us the books Government and Deliverance , published by the Watch Tower Society .
When my father read those books , his faith in God was awakened .

Sadly , in 1939 he became very ill , but before he died he told my mother : “ This is the truth .
Teach it to the children . ”
In April 1951 , the authorities began sending Witnesses from the western USSR to Siberia into exile .

Together with my mother and my younger brother , Grigory , I was banished from West Ukraine .
After traveling over 3,700 miles ( 6,000 km ) by train , we arrived in the city of Tulun in Siberia .
Two weeks later my older brother , Bogdan , arrived in a camp in the nearby city of Angarsk .

He had been sentenced to 25 years of hard labor .
My mother , Grigory , and I preached in the settlements around Tulun , but we had to be resourceful .
For example , we would ask , “ Is there anyone here who wants to sell a cow ? ”
When we found someone with a cow to sell , we would mention to that person how amazingly designed cows are .
Before long , we would be talking about the Creator .
At that time , a newspaper wrote about the Witnesses that they ask about cows but they are looking for sheep !
And we found sheeplike ones !
It was a pleasure to study the Scriptures with the humble and hospitable people in that unassigned territory .

Today , there is a congregation with over 100 publishers in Tulun .
My wife , Maria , learned the truth in Ukraine in the middle of World War II .
When she was 18 years old , a KGB officer began to harass her and tried to force her to commit immorality with him , but she firmly rejected his advances .

One day , she returned home and found the man lying on her bed .

Maria fled .
Furious , the officer threatened to have her locked up for being a Witness , and indeed , in 1952 , Maria was sentenced to ten years in prison .
She felt like Joseph , who was imprisoned for keeping his integrity .
The driver who took Maria from the courtroom to the prison told her : “ Don’t be afraid .
Many people go to prison but return with their dignity intact . ”
Those words strengthened her .
From 1952 to 1956 , Maria was put to work in a labor camp near the city of Gorkiy ( now Nizhniy Novgorod ) in Russia .
She was ordered to uproot trees , even in freezing weather .
Her health suffered , but in 1956 she was set free and headed for Tulun .
When a brother in Tulun told me that a sister was coming , I went on my bicycle to the bus stop to meet the sister and to offer to help with her luggage .
When I met Maria , I liked her right from the start .
It took effort to win her heart ​ — but I succeeded .
We got married in 1957 .
A year later , our daughter Irina was born , but the joy of being with her was cut short .

In 1959 , I was arrested for printing Bible literature .
I spent half a year in solitary confinement .
To maintain peace of heart during that time , I constantly prayed , sang Kingdom songs , and imagined how I would preach if I were free again .
While living in a labor camp , 1962
While in prison , during an interrogation the investigator yelled , “ Soon we will stamp you people out like mice against the floor ! ”
I replied , “ Jesus said that the good news of the Kingdom WILL be preached in all the nations , and no one can stop it . ”
Then , the investigator switched tactics and tried to persuade me to renounce my faith , as I mentioned in the introduction .
When neither threats nor enticements worked , I was sentenced to seven years of hard labor in a camp near the city of Saransk .
On my way to the camp , I learned that our second daughter , Olga , had been born .
Although my wife and daughters were far away , I drew comfort from knowing that Maria and I had remained loyal to Jehovah .
Maria and our daughters , Olga and Irina , in 1965
Once a year Maria traveled to Saransk to visit me , although the journey from Tulun and back took 12 days by train .
Each year she would bring me a new pair of boots .
Hidden in the heels of the boots were recent copies of The Watchtower .
One year Maria’s visit was very special because she brought our two young daughters with her .
Imagine how touched I was to see them and to be with them !
In 1966 , I was freed from the labor camp and the four of us moved to the city of Armavir , near the Black Sea .
There , our sons Yaroslav and Pavel were born .
It did not take long before KGB officers began to raid our home , looking for Bible literature .
They searched everywhere , even in the cows ’ feed .
On one such occasion , the officers were perspiring from the heat , and their suits were covered in dust .
Maria felt sorry for them , as they were only obeying orders .
She poured them some juice and brought them a clothes brush , a bowl of water , and towels .
Later , when the KGB chief arrived , the officers told him about the kind treatment they had received .
When they left , the chief smiled and waved to us .
We were happy to see the good that can result when we try to “ keep conquering the evil with the good . ” ​ — Rom .
12 : 21 .
Despite the raids , we continued to preach in Armavir .
We also helped to strengthen a small group of publishers in the nearby town of Kurganinsk .
It gives me much joy to know that today there are six congregations in Armavir and four in Kurganinsk .
Through the years , there were times when our spirituality weakened .
But we are grateful to Jehovah that he used faithful brothers to correct us and to strengthen us spiritually .
It was also a serious test for us to serve alongside KGB agents who infiltrated the congregations without our realizing it .
They appeared to be zealous and were active in the ministry .
Some even received positions of responsibility in the organization .
In time , though , we found out who they really were .
In 1978 , when Maria was 45 , she again became pregnant .
Because she suffered from a chronic heart condition , the doctors feared for her life and tried to convince her to have an abortion .
Maria refused .
In response , some doctors followed her everywhere in the hospital with a syringe , trying to inject her and induce a premature birth .
To protect the unborn child , Maria ran away from the hospital .
The KGB ordered us to leave the city .
We moved to a village near the city of Tallinn in Estonia , which was then part of the USSR .

In Tallinn , contrary to the doctors ’ prediction , Maria gave birth to a healthy son , Vitaly .

Later , we moved from Estonia to the settlement of Nezlobnaya in the south of Russia .
We preached cautiously in the neighboring resort towns , which were visited by people from all over the country .
They came there for health reasons , but some left with the hope of everlasting life !
We tried to inculcate in our sons and daughters a love for Jehovah and a desire to serve him .
We often invited to our home brothers who were a good influence on our children .
One regular visitor was my brother Grigory , who served as a traveling overseer from 1970 to 1995 .
The whole family enjoyed his visits because he was joyful and had a good sense of humor .
When we had guests , we often played Bible games , and our children grew to love the Bible’s historical accounts .
My sons and their wives .
From left to right , back row : Yaroslav , Pavel , Jr . , Vitaly

Front row : Alyona , Raya , Svetlana
In 1987 , our son Yaroslav moved to the city of Riga in Latvia , where he was able to preach more openly .
But when he refused to perform military service , he was sentenced to one and a half years behind bars and was held in nine different prisons .


What I had told him about my experiences in prison helped him to endure .
Later , he began serving as a pioneer .
In 1990 , our son Pavel , then 19 years old , wanted to pioneer on Sakhalin , an island north of Japan . At first , we did not want him to go .
There were only 20 publishers on the whole island , and we lived over 5,500 miles ( 9,000 km ) away from the island .
But eventually we agreed , and it was a good decision .
The people there responded to the Kingdom message .

Within a few years , there were eight congregations .
Pavel served on Sakhalin until 1995 .
By then , only our youngest son , Vitaly , remained at home .
From childhood , he loved reading the Bible .
At age 14 , he began pioneering , and I pioneered with him for two years .

It was a wonderful time .
When he was 19 , Vitaly left to serve as a special pioneer .
Back in 1952 , a KGB officer had told Maria : “ Renounce your faith or face ten years of imprisonment .
When you come out , you will be old and alone . ”
But things worked out very differently .
We felt the love of our loyal God , Jehovah , of our children , and of the many whom we have been privileged to help find the truth .
Maria and I had the joy of visiting the places where our children served .
We saw the gratitude of those who had been helped by our children to learn about Jehovah .
In 1991 , the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses was given legal recognition .
That decision gave renewed vigor to the preaching work .
Our congregation even bought a bus so that we could travel to neighboring towns and villages each weekend .
With my wife in 2011

I am happy that Yaroslav and his wife , Alyona , and Pavel and his wife , Raya , serve at Bethel while Vitaly and his wife , Svetlana , serve in the circuit work .
Our eldest daughter , Irina , and her family live in Germany .
Her husband , Vladimir , and their three sons all serve as elders .
Our daughter Olga lives in Estonia and regularly calls me .
Sadly , my dear wife , Maria , died in 2014 .
I cannot wait to see her again in the resurrection !
Now I live in the city of Belgorod , and the brothers here are a huge support to me .
My years of service to Jehovah have taught me that keeping integrity comes at a cost but the inner peace that Jehovah gives in return is a treasure of surpassing value .
The blessings Maria and I received for remaining steadfast have been greater than I could ever have imagined .
Before the fall of the USSR in 1991 , there were just over 40,000 publishers .
Today , there are over 400,000 publishers in the countries that were once part of the Soviet Union !
I am now 83 years old and continue to serve as an elder .
Jehovah’s support has always given me the strength to endure .
Yes , Jehovah has richly rewarded me . ​ — Ps .
13 : 5 , 6 .
KGB is the Russian abbreviation for Soviet State Security Committee .
“ Strip off the old personality with its practices . ” ​ — COL .
3 : 9 .
SONGS : 121 , 142
What makes our worldwide brotherhood unique ?
What are some practices that must be put away and kept away ?
How can we strip off and keep off the old personality ?
1 , 2 .
What has been noted about Jehovah’s Witnesses ?
OBSERVERS have commented on the outstanding qualities seen among Jehovah’s people .
For example , regarding our brothers and sisters in Nazi Germany , author Anton Gill wrote : “ Jehovah’s Witnesses attracted the especial enmity of the Nazis . . . .
By 1939 there were 6,000 of them in the [ concentration camps ] . ”
Even so , despite the bitter persecution they endured , adds the author , the Witnesses showed “ dependability and equanimity [ calmness under stress ] ” as well as “ integrity and solidarity . ”
More recently , observers in South Africa noticed similar attractive qualities among God’s people .
At one time , Witnesses of different skin color in that country could not freely associate with one another .
However , on Sunday , December 18 , 2011 , it was a wonderful sight to see over 78,000 of our brothers of different races from South Africa and neighboring countries packed into the largest stadium in the city of Johannesburg to enjoy a spiritual program .
In commenting on those gathered , one of the managers of the stadium said : “ This is the best - behaved crowd I have ever seen in this stadium .
All are neatly dressed .
And you people have cleaned the stadium so nicely .
But most of all , you are truly multiracial . ”
What makes our brotherhood unique ?
Such comments by non - Witnesses show that our international brotherhood is truly unique .
What , though , makes us so different from any other organization ?
With the help of God’s Word and his holy spirit , we work hard to “ strip off the old personality . ” In its place , we “ clothe [ ourselves ] with the new personality . ” ​ — Col .
3 : 9 , 10 .
What will be considered in this article , and why ?
It is one thing to strip off the old personality , yet quite another to keep it off .
In this article , we will consider how we can strip off the old personality , why doing so is urgent , and why change is possible no matter how deeply involved one may be in wrong practices .
We will also examine what those who have been in the truth for many years can do to keep off the old personality .
Why are such reminders needed ?
Sadly , some who once served Jehovah have lowered their guard and have slipped back into their old ways .
Thus , we all need to take to heart the warning : “ Let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall . ” ​ — 1 Cor .
10 : 12 .
( a ) Illustrate why it is urgent to strip off the old personality .
( See opening picture . ) ( b ) According to Colossians 3 : 5 - 9 , what practices belong to the old personality ?
What would you do if your clothing became dirty , perhaps even having a foul odor ?
You would strip off the soiled garment as soon as possible .
Similarly , we need to act with urgency in obeying the command to strip off habits that are contrary to God’s personality .
We want to heed Paul’s clear instruction to Christians in his day : “ You must put them all away from you . ”
Let us consider two of the sinful practices listed by Paul ​ — sexual immorality and uncleanness . ​ — Read Colossians 3 : 5 - 9 .
6 , 7 . ( a ) How do Paul’s words show that strong measures are needed to strip off the old personality ?
( b ) What kind of life did Sakura live , and what gave her the strength to leave it behind ?
Sexual immorality .
The meaning of the original Bible word translated “ sexual immorality ” includes sexual relations between individuals who are not legally married to each other and homosexuality .
Paul told fellow Christians to “ deaden ” their “ body members ” ​ — that is , to eliminate any desires — ​ “ as respects sexual immorality . ”
Paul’s descriptive language clearly shows that strong measures are needed to wipe out such wrong desires . Yet , the fight against sinful desires can be won .
Consider what happened to Sakura * from Japan .
Growing up , she struggled with loneliness and a feeling of emptiness .
From the age of 15 , she began to have sexual relations with different partners in order to relieve her loneliness .
“ As a result , ” she confesses with shame , “ I had three abortions . ”
She explains : “ At first , I got a sense of security when having immoral relations , thinking that I was needed and loved .
But the more I had sexual relations , the more insecure I felt . ”
This way of life continued until Sakura was 23 years old .
Then she began to study the Bible with the Witnesses .
Sakura loved what she learned , and with Jehovah’s help she was able to overcome deep feelings of guilt and shame and to put away sexual immorality .
Sakura now serves as a regular pioneer and no longer feels lonely .
Instead , as she puts it , “ I am really happy to be basking in Jehovah’s love day in and day out . ”
What are some things that can make us unclean in God’s eyes ?
Uncleanness .
The original Bible word translated “ uncleanness ” is a broad term that includes much more than sexual sins .

It can refer to the harmful practice of smoking or the telling of obscene jokes .
It also applies to unclean activities practiced by an individual in private , such as reading sexually stimulating books or viewing pornography , which may lead to the unclean habit of masturbation . ​ — Col .
3 : 5 .
*
Nurturing “ uncontrolled sexual passion ” can have what consequences ?
Those who habitually view pornography nurture “ uncontrolled sexual passion , ” which may result in their becoming addicted to sex .
Research indicates that individuals who admitted to having an irresistible urge to watch pornography show the same signs of addiction as do alcoholics and drug addicts .
No wonder the practice of viewing pornography has harmful results ​ — such as deep feelings of shame , low productivity in the workplace , unhappy family life , divorce , and suicide .
On celebrating a year of being free of his addiction to pornography , one man wrote : “ I have restored a sense of personal integrity that was missing . ”
How did Ribeiro overcome his addiction to pornography ?
For many , staying free from pornography is an ongoing battle .
Yet , as shown by what happened to Ribeiro from Brazil , this battle can be won .
Ribeiro left home when he was in his teens and in time began working in a paper - recycling plant , where he was exposed to pornographic materials .
He relates : “ Slowly , I became addicted .

It got so bad that I could not wait for the woman I was living with to leave the house so that I could watch pornographic videos . ”
Then , one day at work , Ribeiro looked at a pile of books that were to be recycled , and he noticed a book with the title The Secret of Family Happiness .
He picked it up from the pile and read it .
What he learned moved him to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses , but it took him a long time to break his bad habit .
What helped him eventually ?
He explains : “ Through prayer , Bible study , and meditation on what I learned , my appreciation of God’s qualities increased until my love for Jehovah became stronger than my desire for pornography . ”
Helped by the power of God’s Word and his holy spirit , Ribeiro stripped off his old personality , got baptized , and now serves as a congregation elder .
What is needed for a person to stay free from pornography ?
Notice that Ribeiro had to do more than simply study the Bible to succeed in his struggle .
He had to take time to allow the Bible’s message to touch his heart .
By prayer and meditation , his love for God overpowered the craving for pornography .
Developing a strong love for Jehovah and a hatred for what is bad is the best way to stay free from pornography . ​ — Read Psalm 97 : 10 .
What helped Stephen to put away anger and abusive speech ?
People who are quick - tempered often express their anger with abusive speech .
Obviously , such conduct cannot contribute to a happy family life .
Relates Stephen , a father from Australia : “ I used to swear a lot and would regularly fly into a rage over trivial things .
My wife and I were separated three times and were in the process of getting divorced . ”
Then , the Witnesses began to study the Bible with the couple .
What was the outcome when Stephen began to follow the Bible’s advice ?
He says : “ Our family life improved dramatically .
With Jehovah’s help , I now have an overriding sense of peace and calm , whereas before I was a time bomb of bitterness and rage , ready to explode at the slightest annoyance . ”
Today , Stephen serves as a ministerial servant , and his wife has been a regular pioneer for several years .
The elders of the congregation that Stephen attends note : “ Stephen is a quiet , hardworking brother , and he has a humble attitude . ”
They cannot recall ever seeing him angry .
Does Stephen accept the credit for this ?
He states : “ None of these beautiful blessings would be part of my life if I hadn’t accepted Jehovah’s help to give my personality a complete makeover . ”
What makes anger so dangerous , and what warning does the Bible give ?
For good reason , the Bible warns against anger , abusive speech , and screaming .
Sadly , such conduct often escalates into violence .
The world may view angry behavior as normal , but it dishonors our Creator .
Many had to strip off these harmful ways before being able to clothe themselves with the new personality . ​ — Read Psalm 37 : 8 - 11 .
Is it possible for an aggressive person to become meek ?
Consider the example of Hans , who serves as an elder in a congregation in Austria .
“ He is one of the meekest brothers you could ever wish to meet , ” says the coordinator of the body of elders in the congregation to which Hans belongs .
But Hans was not always meek .
While in his teens , he began to abuse alcohol and , as a result , turned aggressive .
In an alcohol - induced rage , he killed his girlfriend , for which he received a 20 - year prison sentence .

At first , life in prison did not change Hans ’ aggressive personality .
In time , his mother arranged for an elder to contact her son in prison , and Hans began to study the Bible .
He explains : “ It was a struggle for me to strip off my old personality .
Bible texts that encouraged me were Isaiah 55 : 7 , which says : ‘ Let the wicked man leave his way , ’ and 1 Corinthians 6 : 11 , which says about those who had abandoned sinful ways : ‘ And yet that is what some of you were . ’
For many years , Jehovah patiently helped me by means of his holy spirit to put on the new personality . ”
After having served 17 - and - a - half years of his sentence , Hans was released from prison as a baptized Christian .
He states : “ I am grateful for Jehovah’s overwhelming mercy and forgiveness . ”
What practice is common , but what does the Bible say about it ?
Besides abusive speech , the practice of lying is also a trait of the old personality .
For example , it is common for people to lie on tax returns or to lie to avoid taking responsibility for their sins .
By contrast , Jehovah is “ the God of truth . ”
Therefore , he requires that “ each one ” of his worshippers “ speak truth with his neighbor ” and “ not lie . ”
Thus , we must tell the truth even if it may be embarrassing or inconvenient . ​ — Prov . 6 : 16 - 19 .
How can one succeed in stripping off the old personality ?
Stripping off old personality traits cannot be done in one’s own strength .
The individuals mentioned in this article ​ — Sakura , Ribeiro , Stephen , and Hans — ​ had to fight hard to put away their bad practices .
They gained the victory by opening their mind and heart to the power of God’s Word and his holy spirit .
To benefit from that power , we must read the Bible daily , meditate on it , and pray constantly for the wisdom and strength to apply Bible counsel .
We also benefit from God’s Word and his holy spirit when we prepare for and attend congregation meetings .
In addition , we want to make good use of the various means by which spiritual food is now made available to God’s people worldwide . ​ — Luke 12 : 42 .
How can we succeed in stripping off the old personality ?
( See paragraph 16 )
What will be discussed in the next article ?
We have considered a number of bad practices that Christians must strip off and keep off .
But is that all that is required to gain God’s approval ?
No .
We must also clothe ourselves with the new personality .
In the following article , we will consider several aspects of the new personality that we need to make a permanent part of our figurative clothing .
Some of the names in this article have been changed .
See chapter 25 in the book Questions Young People Ask ​ — Answers That Work , Volume 1 .
“ Clothe yourselves with the new personality . ” ​ — COL .
3 : 10 .
SONGS : 126 , 28
What aspect of the new personality greatly contributes to our unity ?
In what ways can we display compassion and kindness ?
How can we demonstrate humility and mildness ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) Why is putting on the new personality within our reach ?
( b ) What aspects of the new personality are recorded at Colossians 3 : 10 - 14 ?
“ THE new personality . ” That expression occurs twice in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
It refers to a personality that is “ created according to God’s will . ”
Developing such a new personality is within our reach .
Why ? Because Jehovah created humans in his image and thus made it possible for us to reflect his beautiful qualities . ​ — Gen .
1 : 26 , 27 ; Eph .
5 : 1 .
True , because of the imperfection we inherited from our first parents , we are affected by wrong desires .
We may also have been deeply influenced by our environment .
Yet , with Jehovah’s merciful help , we can succeed in becoming the sort of person he wants us to be .
To strengthen our desire to reach that goal , we will consider several aspects of the new personality that the apostle Paul was inspired to write about .
( Read Colossians 3 : 10 - 14 . )
We will also consider how we can demonstrate these aspects in our ministry .
What is one characteristic of the new personality ?
After exhorting us to put on the new personality , Paul goes on to describe impartiality as one striking characteristic of the new personality .
He stated : “ There is neither Greek nor Jew , circumcision nor uncircumcision , foreigner , Scythian , slave , or freeman . ”

* In the congregation , why should there be no distinction based on race , nationality , or social status ? Because true followers of Christ “ are all one . ” ​ — Col .
3 : 11 ; Gal .
3 : 28 .
( a ) How do servants of Jehovah need to treat others ?
( b ) What situation can pose a challenge to Christian unity ?
Those clothed with the new personality treat fellow believers and outsiders with dignity , regardless of their social or racial background .
This can be a challenge in some parts of the world .
For example , in South Africa most Witnesses still live in areas that were set apart for their race ​ — be it affluent suburbs , black townships , or areas where people of mixed race once had to live .
Hence , to encourage our brothers to “ widen out , ” in October 2013 the Governing Body approved a special arrangement to help the brothers to get to know one another better .
What did it involve ?
5 , 6 . ( a ) To strengthen the unity among God’s people in one country , what arrangements were made ?
( See opening picture . ) ( b ) What have been the results ?

Arrangements were made for two congregations of different language or race to be together on some weekends .
Brothers and sisters from both congregations shared in the preaching work , attended meetings together , and enjoyed hospitality at the homes of one another .
Hundreds of congregations took part , and the branch office received many good reports about this arrangement , even from outsiders .
For example , one religious minister was moved to say , “ I am not a Witness , but I will say that you have an outstandingly organized preaching work , and you have racial unity . ”
How did the arrangement affect the Witnesses ?
At first , a Xhosa - speaking sister named Noma had reservations about inviting white brothers from an English - language congregation to her modest home .
But after sharing in the preaching work with the white Witnesses and enjoying hospitality in their homes , she exclaimed , “ They are normal people just like us ! ”
So when it was the turn of her Xhosa - language congregation to extend hospitality to the English - language congregation , she prepared a meal and invited some visitors .
Among her guests was a white elder .
Noma said , “ I was impressed that he was willing to sit close to the floor on a plastic crate . ”
As a result of this ongoing arrangement , many brothers and sisters made new friends and are determined to continue to widen out in their associations .
Why is there an ongoing need to show compassion ?
Until Satan’s world comes to an end , we will continue to experience trials .
We deal with unemployment , serious illnesses , persecution , natural disasters , loss of possessions because of crime , or other hardships .
To support one another in our suffering or adversity , we need to have genuine compassion .
Feeling tender compassion will move us to acts of kindness .
These aspects of the new personality will help us to imitate God and be of comfort to others . ​ — 2 Cor .
1 : 3 , 4 .
Our showing compassion and kindness to all in the congregation may lead to what good results ?
Give an example .
How can we show even greater consideration toward foreigners or disadvantaged ones in our congregation ?
We need to befriend such individuals and help them to see that they are a valuable part of the congregation .
Consider what happened to Dannykarl who moved from the Philippines to Japan .
At his workplace , he was not treated as well as the local employees .
Then he attended a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses .
“ Almost all in attendance were Japanese , ” says Dannykarl , “ yet they gave me a warm welcome , as if they were my old acquaintances . ”
He continued to experience expressions of kindness , which helped him to make spiritual progress .
He was baptized , and today he serves as an elder .
His fellow elders view Dannykarl and his wife , Jennifer , as a blessing to the congregation .
The elders say about them , “ They lead a very simple life as pioneers and set a fine example of seeking the Kingdom first . ” ​ — Luke 12 : 31 .
9 , 10 .
Give examples of the rewards that come from showing compassion in the ministry .
When we share the Kingdom message with others , we have a fine opportunity to do “ good toward all . ”
Out of compassion for immigrants , many Witnesses endeavor to learn a new language .
This has led to rich blessings .
For example , a pioneer sister in Australia named Tiffany learned Swahili in order to be of help to a Swahili - language congregation in the city of Brisbane .
Though learning the language was a struggle for Tiffany , her life has been enriched .
She says : “ If you want an exciting ministry , serving in a foreign - language congregation is for you .
It’s like traveling without leaving your city .
You get to experience our worldwide brotherhood and see its miraculous unity firsthand . ”
What moves Christian ministers to help immigrants ?
( See paragraph 10 )
Consider also the example of a family in Japan .
Sakiko , the daughter , relates : “ In the 1990 ’ s , we often met Brazilian immigrants when we were in the field ministry .
When we showed them scriptures from their Portuguese Bible , such as Revelation 21 : 3 , 4 or Psalm 37 : 10 , 11 , 29 , they paid attention and sometimes even shed tears . ”
But the family’s compassion did not stop there .
“ When we saw their spiritual hunger , ” says Sakiko , “ we began to study Portuguese as a family . ”
Later , the family helped to establish a Portuguese - language congregation .
Through the years , the family helped many immigrants to become servants of Jehovah .
“ It took a lot of work to learn Portuguese , ” adds Sakiko , “ but the blessings far outweigh the efforts .
We are so thankful to Jehovah . ” ​ — Read Acts 10 : 34 , 35 .
11 , 12 . ( a ) Why is having the right motive for putting on the new personality so important ?
( b ) What will help us to remain humble ?
Our motive for clothing ourselves with the new personality must be to honor Jehovah , not to win praise from men .
Remember that even a once perfect spirit creature sinned because he allowed himself to become filled with pride .
( Compare Ezekiel 28 : 17 . )
How much more difficult it is for sinful humans to avoid improper pride and haughtiness !
Still , it is possible to clothe ourselves with humility .
What will help us to do so ?
To remain humble , we need to set aside time to meditate daily on what we read in God’s Word .
In particular , we do well to reflect on Jesus ’ teachings and his wonderful example of humble service .
Jesus even washed the feet of his apostles .
We also need to pray frequently for God’s spirit to help us fight any tendency of feeling superior to others . ​ — Gal .
6 : 3 , 4 ; Phil .
2 : 3 .
What are the rewards for being humble ?
Read Proverbs 22 : 4 .

Humility is required of all true worshippers and brings great rewards .
Being humble will help us to promote peace and unity in the congregation .
Developing and strengthening humility will also make us recipients of God’s undeserved kindness .
The apostle Peter stated : “ All of you clothe yourselves with humility toward one another , because God opposes the haughty ones , but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones . ” ​ — 1 Pet .
5 : 5 .
Who is the best example in showing mildness and patience ?
In today’s world , people who are mild and patient are often considered weak .
How far such reasoning is from the truth !
These beautiful qualities originate from the most powerful Person in the universe .
Jehovah God is the best example of showing mildness and patience .
Consider how he responded through his angelic representatives when Abraham and Lot questioned him .
Also , for over 1,500 years , Jehovah put up with the wayward nation of Israel . ​ — Ezek .
33 : 11 .
What example did Jesus set in showing mildness and patience ?
Jesus was “ mild - tempered . ”
He showed great patience in putting up with the weaknesses of his followers .
Throughout his earthly ministry , Jesus endured unjust criticism from religious opposers .
Yet , he was mild and patient right up to his wrongful execution .
While suffering agonizing pain on the torture stake , Jesus prayed that his Father forgive his executioners because , as he said , “ they do not know what they are doing . ”
What an outstanding example of mildness and patience under painful and stressful circumstances ! ​ — Read 1 Peter 2 : 21 - 23 .

In what practical way can we show mildness and patience ?
How can we show mildness and patience ?
Paul mentioned one way when he wrote to fellow believers : “ Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another .
Just as Jehovah freely forgave you , you must also do the same . ”
Indeed , it takes mildness and patience on our part to obey this command .
But by being forgiving , we promote and preserve the unity in the congregation .
Why are mildness and patience important ?
Being clothed with mildness and patience is not optional for a Christian .
It is an essential requirement for our salvation .
More important , by means of these qualities , we honor Jehovah and help others to heed the Bible’s counsel . ​ — Gal .
6 : 1 ; 2 Tim .
2 : 24 , 25 .
What connection is there between love and impartiality ?
All the qualities considered thus far are closely connected with love .
For example , the disciple James had to counsel his brothers for favoring the rich over the poor .
He showed that such conduct violated the royal law : “ You must love your neighbor as yourself . ”
Then he added : “ If you continue showing favoritism , you are committing sin . ”
In contrast , love will move us to avoid any discrimination based on education , race , or social status .
Indeed , impartiality needs to be more than a veneer . It must be a genuine part of our personality .
Why is it important that we clothe ourselves with love ?
Love is also “ patient and kind ” and “ does not get puffed up . ”
It truly takes patience , kindness , and humility to continue sharing the Kingdom message with our neighbors .
These same qualities make it easier for us to get along with all the brothers and sisters in the congregation .
What is the reward for showing such love ?
It produces united congregations that reflect well on Jehovah and that attract newly interested ones .
Fittingly , the Bible’s description of the new personality concludes with this powerful truth : “ Besides all these things , clothe yourselves with love , for it is a perfect bond of union . ” ​ — Col .
3 : 14 .
( a ) What questions should we ask ourselves , and why ?
( b ) We look forward to what time ?
Each of us should ask himself , ‘ What more can I do to strip off and keep off the old personality ? ’
We need to pray fervently for God’s help and work hard to overcome any attitude or practice that will prevent us from inheriting God’s Kingdom .
We also need to ask , ‘ Do I continue to be made new in my dominant mental attitude ? ’
Putting on and keeping on the new personality is an ongoing process for all Christians until we are able to do so to the full .
Imagine how wonderful life will be when everyone we know is clothed to perfection with the new personality !
In Bible times , Scythians were looked down on as uncivilized people .
LOVE
JOY PEACE
PATIENCE
KINDNESS
GOODNESS
FAITH

MILDNESS
SELF - CONTROL
THE apostle Paul wrote under inspiration about nine qualities that result from the action of holy spirit .
He described these desirable qualities as forming a whole ​ — “ the fruitage of the spirit . ”
* This fruitage characterizes “ the new personality . ”
Just as a tree will bear fruit when it is properly tended , so a person will manifest the fruitage of the spirit when holy spirit flows freely in his life . ​ — Ps .
1 : 1 - 3 .
The first aspect of the spirit’s fruitage that Paul listed is the precious quality of love .
How precious is it ?
Paul said that without love , he was “ nothing . ”
But just what is love , and how can we develop it and show it every day ?
Although words cannot easily define the quality of love , the Bible describes the way it is expressed .
For example , we read that love is “ patient and kind . ”
Also , it “ rejoices with the truth , ” and it “ bears all things , believes all things , hopes all things , endures all things . ”
Love also involves a feeling of deep affection for others and a sincere concern for them , as well as a warm attachment to them .
On the other hand , a lack of love is revealed by jealousy , pride , indecent behavior , selfishness , and a resentful , unforgiving attitude .
Unlike such heartless and vain qualities , the love we desire to develop “ does not look for its own interests . ” ​ — 1 Cor .
13 : 4 - 8 .
“ God is love . ”
Indeed , Jehovah is the very essence of love . All his works and actions bear witness to his love .
His greatest act of love toward mankind was that of sending Jesus to suffer and die for us .
The apostle John stated : “ By this the love of God was revealed in our case , that God sent his only - begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him .
The love is in this respect , not that we have loved God , but that he loved us and sent his Son as a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins . ”
Because of God’s love , we can obtain forgiveness , hope , and life .
Jesus proved his love for mankind by willingly carrying out God’s will .
Paul wrote : “ [ Jesus ] says : ‘ Look ! I have come to do your will . ’ . . .
By this ‛ will ’ we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all time . ”
No human could show greater love .
Jesus said : “ No one has love greater than this , that someone should surrender his life in behalf of his friends . ”
Can we imperfect humans imitate the love shown to us by Jehovah and Jesus ?
Yes !
Let us consider how we can do so .
Paul exhorts us : “ Become imitators of God , as beloved children , and go on walking in love , just as the Christ also loved us and gave himself for us . ”

We “ go on walking in love ” when we manifest this quality in every aspect of our life .
We show such love by actions rather than by words alone .
John wrote : “ Little children , we should love , not in word or with the tongue , but in deed and truth . ”
For example , when we walk in love for God and neighbor , we will be moved to share the “ good news of the Kingdom ” with them .
We also walk in love when we are patient , kind , and forgiving .
Hence , the Bible counsels us : “ Just as Jehovah freely forgave you , you must also do the same . ” ​ — Col .
3 : 13 .
Such genuine love , however , is not to be confused with sentimentality .
For instance , to calm a crying child , a sentimental parent may cater to the child’s every whim .
But the parent who truly loves his child will be firm when necessary .
Likewise , God is love , but “ those whom Jehovah loves he disciplines . ”
When we walk in love , we will also give proper discipline when needed .
Of course , in doing so we must remember that we too are sinful and prone to unloving acts .
Thus , we all have areas in which we need to improve in showing love .
How can we do this ?
Let us consider three ways .
First , ask God for his spirit , which produces love .
Jesus stated that Jehovah gives “ holy spirit to those asking him . ”
If we pray for holy spirit and endeavor to “ keep walking by spirit , ” our actions will become more and more loving .
For instance , if you are an elder in the Christian congregation , you can ask for holy spirit to help you to give Scriptural counsel to others in a loving manner .
Or if you are a parent , you can request that God’s spirit help you to discipline your children , not in anger , but in love .
Second , reflect on how Jesus showed love even when provoked .
The need to think about Christ’s example may especially arise when we have been offended or have experienced an injustice .
At such times , a good question to ask ourselves is , ‘ What would Jesus do ? ’
A sister named Leigh found that considering this question helped her to think before acting .
She relates : “ Once , a coworker sent an e - mail to my colleagues with negative comments about me and the work I was doing .
It hurt me deeply .
But then I asked myself , ‘ How can I imitate Jesus in dealing with this person ? ’
After reflecting on what Jesus would have done , I decided to let the matter go and not make an issue of it .
Later , I learned that my coworker had been coping with a serious health problem and was under a lot of stress .
I concluded that she probably did not really mean what she wrote .
Reflecting on Jesus ’ example of showing love even when provoked helped me to show similar love to my coworker . ”
Yes , if we imitate Jesus , we will always act with love .
Third , cultivate the spirit of self - sacrificing love , which is the identifying mark of true Christianity .
In this regard , the Scriptures urge us to develop the same “ mental attitude ” that Jesus had .

By leaving heaven , “ he emptied himself ” in our behalf , even “ to the point of death . ”
As we imitate his self - sacrificing love , our thoughts and feelings will become more Christlike , and we will be moved to place the interests of others ahead of our own .
What further benefits come from cultivating love ?
When we show love , the benefits are far - reaching .
Consider two examples : How do we benefit from showing love ?
AN INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD : Because of our love for one another , we know that no matter what congregation we may visit throughout the earth , the brothers and sisters will warmly welcome us .
What a blessing it is to be loved by ‘ the entire association of our brothers in the world ’ !
Where else but among God’s people can such love be found ?
PEACE : “ Putting up with one another in love ” allows us to enjoy “ the uniting bond of peace . ”
We experience this peace firsthand at our congregation meetings , assemblies , and conventions .
Would you not agree that such a peaceful spirit is truly unique in today’s divided world ?
By pursuing peace with others , we demonstrate the depth of our love for them , which is pleasing to our heavenly Father . ​ — Ps .
133 : 1 - 3 ; Matt .
5 : 9 .
Paul wrote : “ Love builds up . ”
How does love do this ?
In the 13th chapter of Paul’s first letter to the Corinthians ​ — in what has been called the “ Psalm of Love ” — ​ the apostle explains how love builds up .
For one thing , it seeks the other person’s advantage .
Additionally , because love is thoughtful , considerate , patient , and kind , it builds affectionate families and united congregations . ​ — Col .
3 : 14 .
Our shared love for God is the most valuable and upbuilding love of all .
Such love unites people of all backgrounds , races , and tongues in happy association to serve Jehovah “ shoulder to shoulder . ”
Let us be determined to show this precious aspect of the fruitage of God’s holy spirit every day .
This is the first article of a nine - part series that will consider each quality , or aspect , of the fruitage of the spirit .
FROM OUR ARCHIVES
IT IS late November 1932 in Mexico City .
Just a week earlier , the first electric traffic lights had made an appearance in this bustling city of over one million inhabitants .
But now the traffic signals were old news .
The city’s reporters have moved on to this week’s event .
With cameras ready , they are at the train station , awaiting the arrival of a special guest ​ — Joseph F .
Rutherford , then president of the Watch Tower Society .


Local Witnesses are also on hand with a hearty welcome for Brother Rutherford , who has come to attend their three - day national convention .
“ Beyond question , ” The Golden Age stated , “ this convention will go down in history as an event of outstanding importance in the onward march of Truth in the republic of Mexico . ”
But what made this convention , attended by only about 150 people , so noteworthy ?
Before that event , there was little Kingdom fruitage in Mexico .
Since 1919 , small assemblies were held , but the number of congregations actually decreased in subsequent years .
The opening of a branch office in Mexico City in 1929 seemed promising .

There were hindrances , however .
When instructed to stop mixing commercial business with the preaching work , one resentful colporteur quit and formed his own Bible study group .
Meanwhile , the branch overseer engaged in unscriptural conduct and had to be replaced .
Loyal Witnesses in Mexico needed a spiritual boost .
During his visit , Brother Rutherford gave these faithful ones great encouragement , delivering two stirring convention talks and five powerful radio lectures .
For the first time , Mexican radio stations carried the good news throughout the country .
After the convention , a newly appointed branch overseer organized the work , and zealous Witnesses went ahead with renewed strength and with Jehovah’s blessing .
1941 convention , Mexico City
The following year saw not one but two conventions held in the country , one in the port city of Veracruz and one in Mexico City .
Hard work in the field began yielding fine results .
In 1931 there were 82 publishers .
Ten years later , there were ten times as many !
Some 1,000 came to Mexico City for the 1941 Theocratic Assembly .
In 1943 the Witnesses put on sandwich signs to advertise the “ Free Nation’s ” Theocratic Assembly held in 12 Mexican cities .
* Two placards were attached at the shoulders and hung , one in front and one behind , an advertising method that had been in use by Witnesses since 1936 .
A 1944 magazine clipping showing a sandwich - sign parade in Mexico City
Commenting on the success of the sandwich - sign parade in Mexico City , the magazine La Nación stated : “ The first [ assembly ] day , [ the Witnesses ] were asked to invite more people .
The following day , they had outgrown the venue . ”
The impact of these parades did not please the Catholic Church , which led a campaign against the Witnesses .
Despite opposition , fearless brothers and sisters kept taking to the streets .
La Nación also reported : “ The whole city saw them . . . men ​ — and women — ​ transformed into advertising ‘ sandwiches . ’ ”
The article featured a picture of brothers on the streets of Mexico City .
Below the picture was the caption : “ Invasion of the streets . ”
In those years , most Witnesses had to make great personal sacrifices to attend the few conventions held in Mexico .
Many delegates came from isolated rural villages , beyond the reach of trains or even roads .
One congregation wrote , “ The only line that passes near this place is a telegraph line . ”

Thus , delegates had to ride mules or walk for days just to reach a train that would take them to the convention city .
Most Witnesses were poor , barely able to pay for a one - way trip to the convention .
On arriving , many stayed with local Witnesses , who lovingly opened their homes to their brothers .
Others slept in Kingdom Halls .
On one occasion , about 90 delegates stayed at the branch , where they had “ as beds 20 cartons of books apiece , in rows . ”
The Yearbook account commented that the grateful guests found these “ beds softer and warmer than the cement floor . ”
For those appreciative Witnesses , gathering in joyful Christian assembly was unquestionably worth all the sacrifices .
Today , as the number of publishers in Mexico steadily climbs toward the one million mark , that grateful spirit still prevails .
* A 1949 branch report from Mexico stated about the brothers : “ The difficult times they have do not dampen their Theocratic spirit because each assembly we have is one of their main topics of conversation for a long time afterward and the question the brethren continually ask is , When are we going to have another assembly ? ”
That report is as true today as it was back then . ​ — From our archives in Central America .
According to the 1944 Yearbook , this assembly “ put Jehovah’s witnesses on the map in Mexico . ”
In Mexico , 2,262,646 people attended the Memorial in 2016 .
Matthew’s account about the events related to Jesus ’ birth and early life differs somewhat from Luke’s account because the Gospel writers told the events from different perspectives .
Matthew’s account focuses on events that involved Joseph .
It relates Joseph’s initial reaction to Mary’s pregnancy , his dream in which an angel explained the situation , and the acceptance of that explanation .
Matthew goes on to tell about Joseph’s dream in which an angel urged him to flee to Egypt , his flight with his family , his dream in which an angel told him to return to the land of Israel , his return , and his decision to settle his family in Nazareth .
In the opening chapters of Matthew’s Gospel , Joseph’s name is mentioned eight times , but Mary’s , only four .
On the other hand , Luke’s account is much more focused on Mary .
It includes Mary’s being visited by the angel Gabriel , her visit to her relative Elizabeth , and Mary’s expression of praise to Jehovah .
Luke also mentions Simeon’s words to Mary regarding Jesus ’ future sufferings .
Even in the account of her family’s visit to the temple when Jesus was 12 years old , Luke quotes the words of Mary , not those of Joseph .
Luke adds that Mary was deeply affected by all these events .
In the first two chapters of Luke’s Gospel , Mary’s name is mentioned 12 times , but Joseph’s , only 3 .
So , then , Matthew describes more of Joseph’s concerns and activities while Luke gives more details about Mary’s role and experiences .
Likewise , the genealogies supplied by the two Gospel writers differ .
Matthew traces Joseph’s ancestry and shows that Jesus as Joseph’s adopted son was the legal heir to David’s kingship .
Why ?
Because Joseph was a descendant of King David through the line of David’s son Solomon .
However , Luke evidently traces Mary’s ancestry and shows that Jesus was the natural heir , “ according to the flesh , ” to David’s kingship .
Why ?
Because Mary was a descendant of King David through the line of David’s son Nathan .
But why does Luke not list Mary in his genealogy as the daughter of Heli , her father ?
Because official genealogies were generally traced through the men .
So when Luke lists Joseph and describes him as the son of Heli , it was understood to mean that Joseph was Heli’s son - in - law . ​ — Luke 3 : 23 .
The genealogical lists by Matthew and Luke clearly establish that Jesus was the foretold Messiah .
In fact , the truth about Jesus ’ genealogy was so well - known that even the Pharisees and Sadducees could not deny it .
Today , both Matthew’s and Luke’s genealogical records remain a part of the foundation of our faith and a testimony to the sureness of the promises of God .
3 Cultivate Self - Control
Jehovah is the supreme example of self - control .
How can humans imitate him in exercising this quality ?
And what practical steps can you take to strengthen your self - control ?
8 Imitate Jehovah’s Compassion
What does it mean to be compassionate ?
Both Jehovah and Jesus have set perfect examples of exercising this quality .
In what practical ways , though , can we imitate their examples ?
And what good results can we obtain from doing so ?
13 Life Story ​ — I Have Been Blessed to Work With Spiritual Men
18 “ The Word of Our God Endures Forever ”
23 “ The Word of God . . . Exerts Power ”
Why is it significant that the Bible continues to be available in more and more languages ?
And how can we show our appreciation for having access to God’s Word in a language we can understand ?
These articles will deepen our gratitude for the Bible as well as our love for its Author .
28 “ Be Courageous . . . and Go to Work ”
Courage is essential for Christians .
How can we benefit from the example of those who in the past displayed this quality ?
How can young ones , parents , older sisters , and baptized brothers show that they are courageous and ready to perform good works ?
“ The fruitage of the spirit is . . . self - control . ” ​ — GAL .
5 : 22 , 23 .
SONGS : 121 , 36
What should we learn from God’s reaction to rebellion ?
What are some Bible examples of self - control and a lack of it ?
How can Bible study help us to cultivate the godly quality of self - control ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What can result from a lack of self - control ?
( b ) Why is the topic of self - control relevant today ?
SELF - CONTROL is a godly quality .
Jehovah possesses self - control in perfect measure .
Humans , however , are imperfect and therefore struggle to maintain self - control .

Indeed , many of the problems that people face today stem from a lack of self - control .
That lack may result in procrastination and underperformance in school or at work .
It may also lead to verbal abuse , drunkenness , violence , divorce , needless debt , addiction , imprisonment , emotional trauma , sexually transmitted disease , and unwanted pregnancy , to name a few . ​ — Ps .
34 : 11 - 14 .
Clearly , people who lack self - control are causing problems for themselves and for others .
And the problem of lacking self - control is worsening .
Self - discipline was studied in the 1940 ’ s , but recent studies have shown that people have become much worse at exercising self - discipline .
This is no surprise to students of God’s Word because the Bible foretold that one evidence that we are living in “ the last days ” is that men would be “ without self - control . ” ​ — 2 Tim .
3 : 1 - 3 .
Why should Christians want to cultivate self - control ?
Why should you be interested in cultivating self - control ?
Consider two important reasons .
First , it has been observed that people who are able to control their impulses generally have fewer major problems .
They are more stable emotionally , they are better at forming wholesome relationships , and they are not as angry and prone to anxiety and depression as are impulsive people .
Second , the ability to resist temptation and to control inappropriate impulses is fundamental to retaining God’s favor .
The failure of Adam and Eve illustrates this truth .
And think of the sad results reaped by others who since then have failed to exercise this important quality .
What should be encouraging to any who are struggling to exercise self - control ?
No imperfect human can exercise perfect self - control .
Jehovah is aware of his servants ’ struggles in this regard , and he wants to help them dominate their sinful tendencies .
As a loving Friend , he warmly encourages sincere individuals who want to serve him but who have a hard time exercising self - control in some area of life . Let us consider Jehovah’s perfect example .
Then we will learn from good examples and bad ones recounted in the Bible .
And we can review practical suggestions that can help us to strengthen our self - control .
5 , 6 .
What example does Jehovah provide regarding self - control ?
Jehovah exercises the quality of self - control perfectly , for he is perfect in all that he does .
We , however , are imperfect .
Even so , in order to understand the quality of self - control , we need to examine Jehovah’s example so that we can better imitate him .
What are some noteworthy instances when Jehovah displayed self - control ?
Think about how Jehovah exercised self - control in dealing with Satan’s brazen rebellion .
That challenge needed to be met .
The Devil’s challenge no doubt aroused indignation , anger , and contempt among heavenly creatures loyal to God .
Perhaps you feel similar emotions when you consider all the suffering Satan has caused .
Jehovah , however , did not react hastily .
His response was measured and entirely fitting .
He has been slow to anger and has been just in dealing with Satan’s revolt .
Why ?
Jehovah has allowed time to pass because he does not want anyone to be destroyed but “ desires all to attain to repentance . ” ​ — 2 Pet .
3 : 9 .
What can we learn from Jehovah’s example ?
Jehovah’s exercise of self - control teaches us that we too ought to weigh our words and consider our steps carefully ; we should not rush into things .
When you face an important issue , give yourself the time you need to act wisely . Pray for wisdom to say or do the right thing .
In the heat of the moment , it is all too easy to react emotionally .
Many of us have lived to regret hasty words or rash actions ! ​ — Prov .
14 : 29 ; 15 : 28 ; 19 : 2 .
( a ) Where can we look for examples of godly qualities ?
( b ) What enabled Joseph to respond as he did when Potiphar’s wife tried to seduce him ?
( See opening picture . )
What Bible examples underscore the value of controlling our reactions ?
You can no doubt recall several Bible characters who exercised appropriate restraint when tested .
One is Jacob’s son Joseph .
He showed restraint when he was serving in the house of Potiphar , the chief of Pharaoh’s guards .
Potiphar’s wife set her eyes on Joseph , who was “ well - built and handsome , ” and she tried to seduce him .
What prevented Joseph from succumbing to her repeated advances ?
No doubt , he took the time to consider what the consequences would be if he were to lower his guard .
And when the situation became critical , he fled from her .
He reasoned : “ How could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God ? ” ​ — Gen . 39 : 6 , 9 ; read Proverbs 1 : 10 .
How can you prepare yourself to resist temptations ?
What does Joseph’s example teach us ?
One thing is that we may need to flee from the temptation to break one of God’s laws .

In the past , some who are now Witnesses struggled with overeating , heavy drinking , smoking , drug abuse , sexual immorality , and the like .
Even after baptism , they may at times be tempted to return to their former practices .
Still , if you are ever tempted to break one of Jehovah’s laws , strengthen yourself by taking time to ponder the disastrous spiritual consequences that you could face for failing to restrain sinful impulses .
You can try to foresee situations in which temptations could likely present themselves and decide how you can avoid them .
Should you ever face such a test , ask Jehovah to give you the wisdom and self - control to resist .
10 , 11 . ( a ) What reality do many adolescents have to face at school ?
( b ) What can help young Christians to resist pressures to engage in wrong conduct ?
Many young Christians face a trial like Joseph’s .
Consider Kim .
Most of her classmates were sexually active , and after a typical weekend , they boasted of their latest sexual encounters .
Kim had no such stories to tell .
She admits that being different at times made her feel “ abandoned and alone ” and that her peers considered her stupid because she did not date .
Yet , Kim was wise enough to know that among many youths the temptation to engage in sex is great .
Schoolmates often asked whether she was still a virgin .
That gave her the opportunity to explain why she would not engage in sex .
We are proud of young Christians who are determined to resist pressure to share in sexual immorality , and Jehovah is proud of them too !
The Bible gives warning examples of individuals who lacked self - control concerning sexual conduct .
It also shows the sad consequences that can result from such uncontrolled behavior .
Anyone facing a situation similar to that of Kim would do well to ponder the case of the naive young man described in Proverbs chapter 7 .
Think , too , of the course Amnon took and the terrible outcome of his behavior .
Parents might help their children to develop self - control and wisdom in regard to romantic relationships by discussing the topic during family worship , using the Bible passages just mentioned .
( a ) How did Joseph restrain his emotions in dealing with his brothers ?
( b ) In what situations must we restrain our emotions ?
On another occasion , Joseph again set a fine example of self - control .
To understand what was in his brothers ’ hearts , Joseph concealed his identity when they appeared before him in Egypt to buy food .
And when his feelings were particularly intense , he withdrew to a private place to hide his tears .
If a fellow Christian or a loved one displays poor judgment , your showing restraint similar to that of Joseph might help you to avoid an impulsive reaction .
If you have disfellowshipped relatives , you may need to control your feelings in order to avoid unnecessary contact with them .
Self - restraint in such situations is not automatic , yet it is easier if we realize that our actions are in line with God’s example and in harmony with his counsel .
What lessons can we learn from accounts concerning King David ?
The Bible offers a notable example in King David .
He wielded great power but refrained from using it out of anger when provoked by Saul and Shimei . That is not to say that David always controlled himself , as we know from his sin with Bath - sheba and his initial reaction to Nabal’s greed .
Nevertheless , we can learn valuable lessons from David .
First , overseers among God’s people need to be especially careful to exercise self - control so that they do not abuse their authority .
Second , no one can be complacent , thinking that he is safe from temptation . ​ — 1 Cor .


10 : 12 .
What experience did one brother have , and why are our reactions in similar situations important ?
What can you do to work on your self - control ?
Consider this real - life situation .
A vehicle rear - ended Luigi’s car .
Despite being in the wrong , the other driver insulted Luigi and tried to start a fight .
Luigi prayed , asked Jehovah to help him keep his composure , and tried to calm the other driver ​ — but to no avail .
Luigi made a note of the man’s insurance details and left while the man was still shouting .
A week later , Luigi was making a return visit on a woman and he learned that her husband was the other driver !

The man was embarrassed and apologized for his tirade .
He offered to contact Luigi’s insurance company to speed up the claim .
The man took part in the spiritual conversation and appreciated what was being said .
In hindsight , Luigi could see how important it was that he had kept calm after the accident and how detrimental it could have been had he lost his temper . ​ — Read 2 Corinthians 6 : 3 , 4 .
Keeping calm or losing our temper can directly or indirectly affect our Christian ministry ( See paragraph 14 )
15 , 16 .
How can Bible study help you and your family to cultivate self - control ?
Diligent and conscientious Bible study can help Christians to develop self - control .
Recall that God told Joshua : “ This book of the Law should not depart from your mouth , and you must read it in an undertone day and night , in order to observe carefully all that is written in it ; for then your way will be successful and then you will act wisely . ”
How is it that Bible study can help you to cultivate self - control ?
As we have just noted , the Scriptures contain accounts that vividly illustrate both the benefits and the consequences of our actions .
Jehovah had these accounts recorded for a purpose .
How wise it is to read them , meditate on them , and study them !
Try to grasp how they apply to you and your family . Ask Jehovah to help you to apply his Word .
If you discern that you are deficient in some aspect of self - control , admit it .
Then pray about it , and strive to see how you can improve .
No doubt , research in our Christian publications can help you to locate relevant material that will further help you .
In what ways can parents help their children to develop self - control ?
How can you help your children to develop self - control ?
Parents know that this quality does not come naturally to young people .
And as is the case with all qualities that their children need to learn , parents should set the example .
So if you see that your children are struggling to control their impulses , ask yourself whether you are setting a fine example .
Do not minimize the good effect of your being regular in the field service , in attending meetings , and in conducting family worship .
Do not be afraid to say no to your children’s requests if need be !
Jehovah set limits for Adam and Eve ​ — limits that could have instilled in them a proper regard for his authority .
Similarly , parental discipline and example have the goal of teaching children self - control .
Love for God’s authority and respect for his standards are among the most precious things that you can cultivate in your children . ​ — Read Proverbs 1 : 5 , 7 , 8 .
Why can you be confident that good associations will prove to be a blessing ?
Certainly , whether you are a parent or not , you should not overlook the need to choose your associations wisely .
Seek the company of those who will encourage you to pursue worthwhile goals and avoid trouble .
Spiritually - minded associates will have a positive influence on you , moving you to imitate their course of life marked by self - control .
And no doubt your good conduct will encourage your friends .
The self - control that results is fundamental to your enjoying everyday life in God’s favor and to sharing good things with your loved ones .
“ Jehovah , Jehovah , a God merciful and compassionate . ” ​ — EX .
34 : 6 .
SONGS : 57 , 147
Why can it sometimes be a challenge to show compassion ?
How does Jehovah teach his people to manifest compassion ?
In what circumstances can you exercise the godly quality of compassion ?
In what special way did Jehovah reveal himself to Moses , and why is this significant ?
ON ONE occasion , God revealed himself to Moses by declaring His own name and qualities .
The first ones that he listed were mercy and compassion .
( Read Exodus 34 : 5 - 7 . )
Jehovah could have stressed his power or his wisdom .
Yet , to Moses , who was seeking reassurance of God’s backing , Jehovah emphasized instead qualities that underscore his willingness to help his servants .
Do you not find it heartwarming that God mentioned these endearing traits ahead of any others ?
This article will focus on the quality of compassion , a sympathetic awareness of another’s suffering or adversity coupled with a desire to lessen it .
2 , 3 . ( a ) What shows that compassion is part of human nature ?
( b ) Why should you be interested in what the Bible says about compassion ?
Humans were made in God’s image .
Accordingly , because Jehovah is compassionate , interest in others ’ well - being is rooted in human nature .
Even those who do not know the true God often show compassion .
We find many accounts in the Bible where a sense of compassion shines through .
Recall the account of the two prostitutes who argued before Solomon over which one of them was the actual mother of a child .
When Solomon put them to the test by ordering that the baby be cut in half , the real mother’s compassion was stirred .
That moved her to act , even at the cost of giving the child up to the other woman .
Or recall Pharaoh’s daughter who saved baby Moses ’ life .
Though she realized that the infant she had found was a child of the Hebrews and should not be kept alive , “ she felt compassion for him ” and decided to raise the child as her own . ​ — Ex .
2 : 5 , 6 .
Why should the topic of compassion interest you ?
Because the Bible urges you to imitate Jehovah .
Yet , while humans were created to be compassionate , our imperfection as descendants of Adam inclines us toward self - interest . Sometimes we may find that it is not easy to decide whether we will help others or concentrate on ourselves .
For some , this is an ongoing conflict , or a balancing act .
What can help you to develop and maintain your interest in others ?
First , take time to examine how Jehovah has shown compassion and how others have shown it .
Second , consider how you can imitate God’s example and how your doing so is truly beneficial .
( a ) Why did Jehovah send angels to Sodom ?
( b ) What does the account about Lot and his daughters teach us ?
We find many instances where Jehovah’s compassion must have been involved .
Think of what God did for Lot .
That righteous man was “ greatly distressed ” by the brazen conduct of the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah .
Indeed , God determined that those immoral people deserved to die .
God sent angels to rescue Lot .
They urged him and his family to flee from the doomed cities .
“ When he kept lingering , then because of Jehovah’s compassion for him , the [ angels ] seized hold of his hand and the hand of his wife and the hands of his two daughters , and they brought him out and stationed him outside the city . ”
Does that example not indicate that Jehovah is fully aware of the difficult situations in which his faithful people sometimes find themselves ? ​ — Isa .
63 : 7 - 9 ; Jas . 5 : 11 , ftn .
; 2 Pet .
2 : 9 .
How does God’s Word , such as at 1 John 3 : 17 , help us learn to show compassion ?
Not only has Jehovah shown compassion but he has also taught his people the need to display that quality .
Consider the law given to Israel regarding the seizing of a man’s garment as security for a loan .
( Read Exodus 22 : 26 , 27 . )
A hard - hearted lender might have been tempted to seize the debtor’s garment , leaving him without a covering in which to sleep .
Yet , Jehovah taught his people to avoid such an unfeeling attitude and course .
His people were to be compassionate .
Does not the principle reflected in that particular law move us to action ?
Would we want to leave our brothers out in the cold , so to speak , if there is something that we can do to relieve their suffering ? ​ — Col .
3 : 12 ; Jas . 2 : 15 , 16 ; read 1 John 3 : 17 .
What lesson can we draw from Jehovah’s persistent efforts to reform the sinful Israelites ?
Jehovah felt compassion for his people Israel even when they sinned .
We read : “ Jehovah the God of their forefathers kept warning them by means of his messengers , warning them again and again , because he felt compassion for his people and for his dwelling place . ”
Should we not feel similar compassion for people who could potentially repent over a sinful life course and gain God’s favor ?
Jehovah does not want any to be destroyed in the coming judgment .
So until God acts to destroy the wicked , let us continue to proclaim his compassionate warning message .
7 , 8 .
Why did one family believe that Jehovah had exercised compassion toward them ?
Many experiences could be used to illustrate God’s acts of compassion .
Consider what happened to the family of a 12 - year - old lad whom we will call Milan .
It was during a time of ethnic strife in the early 1990 ’ s .
Milan , his brother , his parents , and a number of other Witnesses were riding on a bus from Bosnia to Serbia .
They were on their way to a convention at which Milan’s parents intended to get baptized .
But at the border , soldiers pulled the family off the bus because of their ethnicity ; yet , they allowed the other brothers to proceed .
After holding the family for two days , the officer in charge radioed his superior to ask what should be done with them .
The officer was standing right in front of the family , so all heard the response , “ Just take them out and shoot them ! ”
As the officer spoke to his men , two strangers came up to the family and quietly identified themselves as Witnesses .
They had heard of the crisis from others on the bus .

The two told Milan and his brother to get into their car to cross the border , as the children’s papers were not being checked .
The newcomers then told the parents to walk around the back of the border post and meet them on the other side .
Milan did not know whether to laugh or to cry at this suggestion .
“ Do you think they are just going to let us walk off ? ”
his parents asked .
Yet , as they walked away , it seemed as if the soldiers were staring right through them .
The parents and children were reunited on the other side of the border .
They proceeded to the convention city , convinced that Jehovah had answered their desperate prayers for help .
We know from the Bible that there have been times when Jehovah did not directly intervene to protect his servants .
Yet , Milan shares how he felt . He says , “ It seemed to me that the angels blinded the soldiers and that Jehovah rescued us . ” ​ — Ps .
97 : 10 .
How did Jesus respond to the condition of the crowds who followed him ?
( See opening picture . )
We can learn a lesson from Jesus .
He felt compassion for the crowds he met , for “ they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd . ”
How did he react to their pitiful state ?
“ He started to teach them many things . ”



10 , 11 .
Is compassion always appropriate ?
Explain .
That is not to say that compassion is to be shown in every situation .
God’s compassion was appropriate in the Bible examples mentioned above .
However , King Saul was disobedient when he showed what he may have felt was compassion .
He spared the life of Agag , an enemy of God’s people , and he also spared the best of the flock .
Consequently , Jehovah rejected Saul from being king over Israel .
Jehovah , of course , is the righteous Judge .
He can read people’s hearts , and he knows when compassion is not warranted .
The time is coming when he will execute judgment on all those who refuse to obey him .
That will not be the time for him to show compassion for those whom he has judged to be wicked .
Rather , executing them will be an appropriate expression of God’s compassion for the righteous , whom he will preserve .
Clearly , it is not our role to judge whether people should be executed or preserved alive .
Instead , we need to do all we can now to help people .
So how can we manifest fitting compassion for our fellow man in practical ways ?
Consider a number of suggestions .
How can you show a compassionate attitude in your dealings with others ?
Be helpful in everyday life .
Showing compassion for one’s neighbor and Christian brothers is a basic requirement of those who strive to imitate Jesus .
One meaning of compassion is “ to suffer together . ”
A person who shows compassion is moved to relieve others ’ suffering , perhaps by helping them out of their difficulties .
Seek opportunities to do so !
For example , could you help someone by offering to perform a necessary chore , maybe running an errand for him ? ​ — Matt .
7 : 12 .
Show your compassion for others by offering practical help ( See paragraph 12 )
What qualities of God’s people become particularly evident in the aftermath of disasters ?
Share in relief work .
The sufferings of those struck by disasters move many to manifest compassion .
Jehovah’s people are known for coming forward to help in such times of need .
One Japanese sister lived in an area that was seriously damaged by the earthquake and tsunami of 2011 .
She says that she was “ very encouraged and comforted ” by the efforts of the many volunteers from elsewhere in Japan and from overseas to repair property damage .
She writes : “ This experience helped me to realize that Jehovah cares .
And fellow Witnesses care about one another .
Many brothers and sisters all over the world are praying for us . ”
How can you assist the sick and the elderly ?
Assist the sick and the elderly .
When we see others experiencing the effects of Adamic sin , we are rightly moved to show compassion .
We long to see sickness and aging brought to an end . So we pray for God’s Kingdom to come .
In the meantime , we do what we can to assist those in need .
Consider what one author wrote about his elderly mother , who suffered from Alzheimer’s disease .
One day , she soiled her clothes .
As she was trying to clean up , the doorbell rang .
The visitors turned out to be two Witnesses who regularly called on the woman .
The sisters asked if there was anything they could do to help . “ It is embarrassing but yes , ” the woman replied .
The visitors helped her to clean up .
Then they made her a cup of tea and stayed for a chat . The son was most grateful .
“ Hats off to these Witnesses , ” he wrote .
“ They practice what they preach . ”
Does your compassion for the sick and the elderly move you to do all you can to lessen their suffering ? ​ — Phil .
2 : 3 , 4 .
What important opportunities does our preaching work offer ?
Help people spiritually .
People’s problems and worries move us to want to help them spiritually .
The best way we can do that is by teaching them about God and about what his Kingdom will do for mankind .
Another way is by helping them to see the wisdom of living by godly standards .
Could you increase the share you are having in the ministry , a work that truly honors Jehovah and manifests your compassion for others ? ​ — 1 Tim .
2 : 3 , 4 .
How does a compassionate person benefit himself ?
Mental - health experts say that practicing compassion can improve your health , well - being , and relationships .
When you relieve the suffering of others , you will feel happier , more optimistic , less lonely , and less inclined to think negative thoughts .
Yes , your showing compassion will benefit you .
Christians who lovingly seek to help others are rewarded with a good conscience , knowing that they are acting in harmony with godly principles .
Having such a disposition makes for a more caring parent , a better spouse , and a better friend .
Those who are quick to show compassion are , in turn , more likely to receive help and support when they need it . ​ — Read Matthew 5 : 7 ; Luke 6 : 38 .
Why do you want to cultivate and show compassion ?
Knowing that compassion is good for you should not be your main reason for wanting to cultivate it .
The principal reason should be your desire to imitate and glorify the Source of love and compassion , Jehovah God .
He sets the perfect example for us . May we do all we can , then , to imitate him ​ — to promote warm affection among our brothers and good relations with our neighbors by showing compassion . ​ — Gal .
6 : 10 ; 1 John 4 : 16 .
LIFE STORY
As told by David Sinclair
IN THE mid - 1930 ’ s , my father and mother ​ — James and Jessie Sinclair — ​ moved to the Bronx , a borough of New York City .
One of their new acquaintances was Willie Sneddon , who came from Scotland , as they did .
Within minutes of their first encounter , the three were talking about their families .

That was a couple of years before I was born .
Mother told Willie that shortly before the Great War , her father and her older brother drowned when their fishing boat hit a mine in the North Sea .
Willie responded , “ Your father is in hell ! ”
Willie was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , and this was my mother’s shocking introduction to Bible truth .
Willie and Liz Sneddon
What Willie said upset my mother because she knew that her father was a good man .
But Willie added , “ Would it do any good if I told you that Jesus went to hell ? ”
Mother recalled the church creed , which in its original form stated that Jesus descended into hell and was raised on the third day .
So she wondered , ‘ If hell is a fiery place where the wicked are tormented , why did Jesus go there ? ’
This was the beginning of my mother’s interest in the truth .
She began attending meetings with the Bronx Congregation and got baptized in 1940 .
With my mother , and later with my father
At that time , Christian parents were given no special encouragement to study the Bible with their children .
When I was a toddler , my father would care for me while my mother attended meetings and shared in the witnessing work on weekends .
After a few years , he and I began attending meetings with my mother .
She was very active in preaching the good news and conducted several Bible studies with interested people .
In fact , there was a time when she held some of her studies as a group because her students lived quite near to one another .
I accompanied her in field service during my school vacations .
In that way , I learned a lot about the Bible and how to teach others what it says .
I am sorry to say that when I was little , I didn’t fully appreciate the truth . I took it for granted .
However , when I was about 12 , I became a Kingdom publisher and regularly shared in the field ministry from then on .
At the age of 16 , I dedicated my life to Jehovah , getting baptized on July 24 , 1954 , at a convention in Toronto , Canada .
Some brothers in our congregation were or had been members of the Bethel family .
They had a strong influence on me .
Their abilities in speaking and explaining Bible truths impressed me .
Although my schoolteachers wanted me to attend university , my goal was to go to Bethel .
Therefore , I turned in a Bethel application at that convention in Toronto .
I did so again in 1955 at a convention in Yankee Stadium , New York City .
Not long thereafter , when I was 17 years old , I received an invitation to start serving at Brooklyn Bethel on September 19 , 1955 .
On my second day at Bethel , I began working in the Bindery at 117 Adams Street .
I was soon working on a gathering machine , which assembled 32 - page sections of books to get them ready for a machine that sewed the books .
At age 17 , I began my service at Brooklyn Bethel
After about a month in the Bindery , I was sent to the Magazine Department because I knew how to type .
Back then , brothers and sisters typed address stencils ( small metal plates ) for new subscribers to The Watchtower and Awake !
A few months later , I was working in the Shipping Department .
Klaus Jensen , the department overseer , asked me if I would be willing to accompany the driver who was taking cartons of literature by truck to the docks for shipping worldwide .
There were also sacks of magazines to be brought to the post office for mailing to congregations throughout the United States .
Brother Jensen said that he thought the physical work would do me good .
I weighed only about 125 pounds ( 57 kg ) and was as skinny as a rail .
Those trips to the docks and the post office helped to strengthen me physically . Brother Jensen evidently knew what was good for me !
The Magazine Department also filled congregation requests for magazines .
Thus I learned about languages in which our magazines were printed in Brooklyn and sent to other parts of the world .
I had never heard of many of the languages but was happy to know that tens of thousands of magazines were being sent to far - flung places .
Though I did not know it at the time , I would have the privilege of visiting many of those places in the years to come .
With Robert Wallen , Charles Molohan , and Don Adams
In 1961 , I was assigned to work in the Treasurer’s Office under the oversight of Grant Suiter .
After a couple of years there , I was called to the office of Nathan Knorr , who was then taking the lead in our worldwide work .
He explained that one of the brothers working in his office was going to attend the Kingdom Ministry School for a month , after which he would work in the Service Department .
I was assigned to take his place and work alongside Don Adams .
By coincidence , Don was the brother who had accepted my Bethel application at the 1955 convention .
Two other brothers already working in the same office were Robert Wallen and Charles Molohan .
The four of us worked together for over 50 years .
What a joy it has been to serve with such faithful spiritual men ! ​ — Ps .
133 : 1 .
My first zone visit in Venezuela , in 1970
Starting in 1970 , I was assigned to travel for a few weeks every year or two to visit a number of branch offices of the Watch Tower Society , making what were then called zone visits .
This involved visiting Bethel families and missionaries worldwide , giving spiritual encouragement , and checking branch office records .
What a joy it was to meet some who had graduated from the early classes of Gilead School and were still serving faithfully in their foreign assignments !
It has been a privilege and a delight to visit over 90 countries in connection with that work .
What a delight to visit brothers in over 90 countries !
All Bethel family members in Brooklyn were assigned to congregations in the New York City area .
The one that I was assigned to was in the Bronx .
The first congregation in that borough had grown and divided .
That original one became known as the Upper Bronx Congregation , which I attended .
In the mid - 1960 ’ s , a Latvian family of Witnesses who had come into the truth in the south Bronx moved into the territory of that congregation .
Livija , the eldest daughter , became a regular pioneer as soon as she finished high school .
A few months later , she moved to Massachusetts to serve where the need for Kingdom publishers was greater .
I began writing to her with news about the congregation , and she would write back to tell me of her success in the ministry in the Boston area .
With Livija
A few years later , Livija was appointed to be a special pioneer .
She wanted to do as much as she could in Jehovah’s service , so she applied for Bethel and was invited to come in 1971 .
It seemed that this might be a hint from Jehovah !
On October 27 , 1973 , we got married and were privileged to have Brother Knorr deliver our wedding talk .
Proverbs 18 : 22 says : “ The one who finds a good wife has found something good , and he receives Jehovah’s favor . ”
Livija and I have thus been favored with over 40 years together in Bethel service .
And we continue to support a congregation in the same general area of the Bronx .
Working with Brother Knorr was truly a pleasure .
He was a tireless worker for the truth and had tremendous appreciation for the missionaries around the world .
Many of them were the first Witnesses in the countries to which they were assigned .
It was very sad to see Brother Knorr suffer from cancer in 1976 .
Once , when he was bedridden , he asked me to read to him some material that was being processed for printing .
He asked me to call Frederick Franz so that he too could come and listen to the reading .
I later found out that because of Brother Franz ’ failing eyesight , Brother Knorr had been spending considerable time reading such material to him .
On a zone visit with Daniel and Marina Sydlik in 1977
Brother Knorr died in 1977 , but those who knew and loved him were comforted because he had finished his earthly course faithfully .
Thereafter , Brother Franz took the lead in our work .
By that time , I was doing secretarial duties for Milton Henschel , who had worked with Brother Knorr for decades .
Brother Henschel informed me that my foremost responsibility at Bethel would now be to help Brother Franz in any way needed .
I would regularly read material to him before it was printed .
Brother Franz had a remarkable memory and the amazing ability to concentrate totally on what was being read .
What a joy it was to help him in that way until he finished his earthly course in December 1992 !
124 Columbia Heights , where I worked for decades
The 61 years that I have spent at Bethel have passed quickly .
My parents both died faithful to Jehovah , and I look forward to welcoming them back in a much better world .
Nothing that this old system of things offers can compare with the wonderful privilege of working with faithful men and women in behalf of God’s people around the world .
Livija and I can truthfully say that during our years in full - time service , “ the joy of Jehovah [ has been our ] stronghold . ” ​ — Neh .
8 : 10 .
No human is indispensable in Jehovah’s organization , and the work of spreading Kingdom truths continues .
It has been a joy and a privilege to work with many stalwart and loyal brothers and sisters over the years .

Most of the anointed ones with whom I have worked are no longer here on earth .
But I am grateful to have been a companion of such faithful spiritual ones in Jehovah’s service .
“ Be courageous and strong and go to work .
Do not be afraid or be terrified , for Jehovah . . . is with you . ” ​ — 1 CHRON .
28 : 20 .
SONGS : 38 , 34
How can young ones and their parents show courage ?
What courage may be needed on the part of older sisters ?
How can baptized brothers show themselves courageous ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What important assignment did Solomon receive ?
( b ) Why did David express concern about Solomon ?
SOLOMON was instructed to oversee one of the most important construction projects of all time ​ — that of the temple in Jerusalem .
The building was to be “ exceedingly magnificent , so that its fame and beauty [ would ] be known in all lands . ”
More important , the temple would be “ the house of Jehovah the true God . ”
Jehovah directed that Solomon be the overseer of this project . ​ — 1 Chron .
22 : 1 , 5 , 9 - 11 .
King David was confident of God’s support , but Solomon was “ young and inexperienced . ”
Would he have the courage to take on the task of building the temple ?
Would his youth and inexperience be an obstacle ?
To succeed , Solomon would need to be courageous and go to work .
What could Solomon learn about courage from his father ?
Solomon likely learned much about courage from his own father .
In his youth , David fought wild animals that carried off his father’s sheep .
He displayed tremendous courage when he confronted a battle - hardened giant .
Yes , with God’s help and a smooth stone , David defeated Goliath . ​ — 1 Sam .

17 : 45 , 49 , 50 .
Why did Solomon need to be courageous ?
How appropriate it was later for David to urge Solomon to be courageous and construct the temple !
( Read 1 Chronicles 28 : 20 . )
If Solomon did not prove to be courageous , fear could paralyze him , and inactivity would be worse than failure .
Why do we need courage ?
Like Solomon , we need help from Jehovah to be courageous and complete the work .
To that end , we can reflect on some past examples of courage .
And we can think about how we can show courage and get our work accomplished .
What impresses you about Joseph’s courage ?
Consider the courage Joseph showed when Potiphar’s wife tempted him to commit sexual immorality .
He must have known that he could face severe consequences if he refused her .
Even so , rather than give in , he showed courage and took decisive action . ​ — Gen .
39 : 10 , 12 .
Describe the courage that Rahab showed .
( See opening picture . )
Rahab is another example of courage .
When Israelite spies went to her home in Jericho , she could have given in to fear and turned them away .
But with confidence in Jehovah , she courageously hid the two men and helped them to get away safely .
Rahab accepted that Jehovah is the true God , and she trusted that somehow he would give the land to the Israelites .
She did not let fear of others , including the king of Jericho and his men , paralyze her .
Rather , she acted in a way that in the end preserved her and her family . ​ — Josh .
6 : 22 , 23 .
How did Jesus ’ courage affect the apostles ?
Jesus ’ faithful apostles set a fine example of courage .
They had seen the courage Jesus displayed .
That example helped them to build courage .
When opposed by the Sadducees , the apostles would not stop teaching on the basis of Jesus ’ name . ​ — Acts 5 : 17 , 18 , 27 - 29 .
How does 2 Timothy 1 : 7 help us to identify the fundamental source of courage ?
Joseph , Rahab , Jesus , and the apostles displayed an inner strength that motivated them to perform good works .
Their courage was not overconfidence .
It came from reliance on Jehovah .
We too face circumstances that require courage .
Rather than rely on ourselves , we must rely on Jehovah .
( Read 2 Timothy 1 : 7 . )
Let us consider two areas of life where we need courage : in our family and in the congregation .
Why do Christian youths need courage ?
Christian youths face many situations in which they need to show courage to serve Jehovah .
They can learn from and follow the basic example of Solomon as he showed courage in making wise decisions to complete the construction of the temple .
Though Christian youths can and should receive guidance from their parents , youths themselves have important decisions to make .
The wise decisions they make about good associations , wholesome entertainment , moral cleanness , and baptism all call for courage .
That is because such young ones are going against the will of Satan , the one who taunts God .
11 , 12 . ( a ) How did Moses set a fine example of courage ?
( b ) How can young ones imitate Moses ’ example ?
One important decision young ones must make involves their goals .
In some lands , young ones are pressured to set goals that center on higher education and a well - paying job .
In other lands , economic conditions may make young ones feel that they must focus on helping to provide materially for their families .
If you find yourself in either situation , consider the example of Moses .
Raised by the daughter of Pharaoh , Moses could have set his goals on attaining prominence or economic security .
What pressure he must have felt to do so from his Egyptian family , teachers , and counselors !
Rather than give in , Moses courageously took a stand for pure worship .
Once he left behind the riches of Egypt , Moses put his confidence in Jehovah .
That led to Jehovah’s blessing at the time , and no doubt more blessings await Moses in the future .
Likewise , Jehovah will bless young ones who courageously work at setting spiritual goals and putting Kingdom interests first in their lives .
He will help them provide for the needs of their families .
In the first century , the young man Timothy focused on spiritual goals , and you can too .
* ​ — Read Philippians 2 : 19 - 22 .
Are you resolved to be courageous in all aspects of your life ?
( See paragraphs 13 - 17 )
How did courage help a young sister reach her goals ?
A Christian sister in Alabama , U.S.A . , had to develop courage to set spiritual goals .
She writes : “ Growing up , I was really shy .
I could barely talk to people at the Kingdom Hall , much less knock on the doors of complete strangers . ”
With the help of her parents and others in the congregation , this young Christian achieved her goal of becoming a regular pioneer .
She states : “ Satan’s world promotes higher education , fame , money , and having a lot of material things as good goals .
Often , those pursuits are unattainable and bring only stress and heartache .
Serving Jehovah , though , has brought me the greatest happiness and sense of accomplishment . ”
What are some instances when Christian parents need courage ?
Christian parents also need courage .

For example , your employer may regularly ask you to work overtime on evenings and weekends ​ — times that you have set aside for family worship , field service , and Christian meetings .
Courage is required to turn down such regular requests and set the right example for your children .
Or perhaps a few parents in the congregation allow their children to do things that you do not want your child to do .
Those parents may ask why your child does not get involved in such activities .
Will you be courageous and tactfully explain the reason for your decision ?
How can Psalm 37 : 25 and Hebrews 13 : 5 help parents ?
We show courage when we help our children to set and reach spiritual goals .
For instance , some parents may hesitate to encourage their child to pursue a career of pioneering , to serve where the need is greater , to enter Bethel service , or to work on theocratic construction projects .
The parents may fear that their child will not be able to care for them when they are old .
However , wise parents show courage and put faith in Jehovah’s promises .
( Read Psalm 37 : 25 ; Hebrews 13 : 5 . )
Then an added way that you can demonstrate courage and reliance on Jehovah is by helping your child to do the same . ​ — 1 Sam .
1 : 27 , 28 ; 2 Tim .
3 : 14 , 15 .
How have some parents helped their children to set spiritual goals , and how has this proved beneficial ?
A couple in the United States helped their children set spiritual goals .
The husband explains : “ Before our children could walk and talk , we would speak to them about the joys of pioneering and serving the congregation .
Now this is their goal .
Having and achieving spiritual goals helps our children to counteract pressures from Satan’s system and to focus on what is real ​ — Jehovah . ”
A brother who has two children wrote : “ Many parents expend much effort and resources helping their children reach goals in such areas as sports , recreation , and education .
It makes so much more sense to expend effort and resources in helping our children reach goals that will help them to maintain a good standing with Jehovah .
It has been a great source of satisfaction not only to see our children reach spiritual goals but to share the journey with them . ”
You can be sure that God will bless parents who help their children to set and reach spiritual goals .
Give examples of courage in the Christian congregation .
There is also a need to show courage in the congregation .
For instance , elders need courage when caring for judicial matters or when helping those who face life - threatening medical emergencies .
Some elders visit prisons to care for the spiritual needs of inmates .
What of single sisters ?
There are now many opportunities for them to expand their ministry by pioneering , moving to where the need is greater , working with the Local Design / ​ Construction program , and applying for the School for Kingdom Evangelizers .
Some are even able to attend Gilead School .
How can older sisters show courage ?
Older women are a blessing to the congregation . How we love these dear sisters !
Some may not be able to do as much as they once did in God’s service , but they can still show courage and go to work .
( Read Titus 2 : 3 - 5 . )
For example , an older sister needs courage if she is asked to talk to a younger sister about modest dress .
She will not scold the sister about her choice of clothing , but she may be able to encourage the younger one to consider how her choice of clothing may affect others .
Such loving expressions of concern may have a positive effect .
( a ) How can baptized brothers be courageous ?
( b ) How can Philippians 2 : 13 and 4 : 13 help brothers to develop courage ?
Others who should be courageous and go to work are baptized brothers .
Courageous men who are willing to take on more responsibility are a blessing to a congregation .
However , some may be reluctant to reach out .
Perhaps a brother has made mistakes in the past , and now he feels that he is not worthy of being a ministerial servant or an elder .
Another brother might have feelings of inadequacy about fulfilling an assignment .
If you feel that way , Jehovah can help you develop courage .
( Read Philippians 2 : 13 ; 4 : 13 . )
Remember , at one point , Moses did not feel qualified for an assignment .
Yet , Jehovah helped him , and in time , Moses developed courage to accomplish the work .
A baptized brother can develop similar courage by seeking God’s help in earnest prayer and by daily reading the Bible .
Meditating on accounts of courage will also help .
He can humbly ask the elders for training and make himself available to help in whatever way is needed .
We urge all baptized brothers to be courageous and work hard for the congregation !
20 , 21 . ( a ) What assurance did David provide Solomon ?
( b ) Of what can we be confident ?
King David reminded Solomon that Jehovah would be with him until the work of building the temple was finished .
With his father’s words impressed on his mind and heart , Solomon did not allow his youth and inexperience to become an obstacle .
He showed great courage , went to work , and with Jehovah’s help completed the magnificent temple in seven and a half years .
As Jehovah helped Solomon , he can help us to be courageous and to accomplish our work , both in our family and in the congregation .
When we show courage in our worship of Jehovah , we can be confident of his blessing now and in the future .
Therefore , “ be courageous . . . and go to work . ”
You will find some practical steps for setting spiritual goals outlined in the article “ Use Spiritual Goals to Glorify Your Creator , ” published in The Watchtower of July 15 , 2004 .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
Two couples share in public witnessing , using carts in front of one of the biggest malls in San Salvador
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .

To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .

Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
“ The green grass dries up , the blossom withers , but the word of our God endures forever . ” ​ — ISA .
40 : 8 .
SONGS : 95 , 97
changes in language ?
political developments ?
opposition to translation ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What would life be like without the Bible ?
( b ) We can benefit from God’s Word especially if what is true ?
CAN you imagine what your life would be like without the Bible ? You would have no reliable advice for day - to - day living .
You would not have satisfying answers to questions about God , life , and the future .
And you would not know of Jehovah’s past dealings with the human family .
Thankfully , we do not face such a bleak situation .
Jehovah has provided us with his Word , the Bible .
And he has guaranteed that its message will endure forever .
The apostle Peter quoted Isaiah 40 : 8 .
That verse does not specifically refer to the Bible as we know it ; yet , the inspired words apply by extension to the Bible’s message .
( Read 1 Peter 1 : 24 , 25 . )
Of course , we can benefit from the Bible particularly if it is available in a language that we understand well .
Those who love God’s Word have long recognized that fact .
Although it has not always been easy , over the centuries sincere individuals have persevered in translating and distributing the Scriptures .
Their desire was in harmony with God’s will that “ all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth . ” ​ — 1 Tim .
2 : 3 , 4 .
What will we consider in this article ?
( See opening picture . )
In this article , we will consider examples of how God’s Word has endured ( 1 ) changes in language , ( 2 ) political developments that influenced the lingua franca , or common language , and ( 3 ) opposition to Bible translation . How will we benefit from this review ?
It will deepen our appreciation for God’s Word .
It will also deepen our love for the Author of the Bible , who provided it for our benefit . ​ — Mic .
4 : 2 ; Rom . 15 : 4 .
( a ) How do languages change over time ?
( b ) What shows that our God is not partial toward any language group , and how does that make you feel ?
Over time , languages tend to change .
Words and expressions may come to mean something completely different .
Perhaps you can think of examples of how a language that you speak has changed .
The same is true of Hebrew and Greek , the languages that most of the Bible was written in .
Modern Hebrew and Greek are quite different from those languages back in Bible times .
So virtually everyone who wants to understand God’s Word must read a translation of it ​ — even those who know modern - day Hebrew or Greek .
Some have felt that they should learn ancient Hebrew and Greek so that they could read the Bible in the original languages .
That , however , may not be as profitable as they imagine .
* Thankfully , the Bible or portions of it have now been translated into nearly 3,000 languages .
Clearly , Jehovah wants people of “ every nation and tribe and language ” to have the opportunity to benefit from his Word .
( Read Revelation 14 : 6 , footnote . ) Does that not draw you even closer to our loving and impartial God ? ​ — Acts 10 : 34 .
What made the King James Version significant ?
The reality that languages change over time also applies to the languages into which the Bible has been translated .
A Bible translation that was easily understood when first produced may later become less effective .
Consider an example involving a Bible translation into English .
The King James Version was first produced in 1611 .
It became one of the most popular English Bibles , and it would come to have a significant impact on the English language .
* Notably , the King James Version drew only limited attention to God’s name .

It used “ Jehovah ” in a few verses , and it used the word “ LORD ” in capital letters in other verses in the Hebrew Scriptures where the divine name originally occurred .
Later printings also used the word “ LORD ” in capital letters in some verses in the Christian Greek Scriptures .
In that sense , the King James Version acknowledged the rightful place of God’s name in the so - called New Testament .
Why are we grateful for the New World Translation ?
Even so , much of the wording in the King James Version became archaic over the centuries .
The same is true of early Bible translations in other languages .
Are we not grateful , then , to have the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures ?
This translation is available in whole or in part in over 150 languages , thus being available to a vast part of the population today .
Its clear wording allows the message of God’s Word to reach our heart .
Significantly , the New World Translation restores God’s name to its rightful place in the Scriptures .
7 , 8 . ( a ) Why were many Jews in the third century B.C.E . unable to understand the Hebrew Scriptures ?
( b ) What is the Greek Septuagint ?
Political developments have sometimes influenced which language was the lingua franca , or common language , at any given time .
How has God seen to it that such developments do not make his Word unclear to people ?
An example from the past helps us to find the answer .
The first 39 books of the Bible were written by Israelites , or the Jews .
They were the people initially “ entrusted with the sacred pronouncements of God . ”
However , by the third century B.C.E . , many Jews no longer understood Hebrew .
Why not ?
Because Alexander the Great had expanded the Grecian Empire by means of his conquests .
As that empire spread , Greek became the common language of many of its subjects , including Jews who were scattered over a vast area .
But as many Jews became Greek - speaking , understanding the Hebrew Scriptures became more difficult for most .
What was the solution ?
About the middle of the third century B.C.E . , the first five books of the Bible were translated from Hebrew into Greek .
Translation of the rest of the Hebrew Scriptures was completed in the second century B.C.E .
The resulting collection of Bible books came to be known as the Greek Septuagint .
The Septuagint is the first known written translation of the entire Hebrew Scriptures .
( a ) How did the Septuagint and other early translations affect readers of God’s Word ?
( b ) What is your favorite portion of the Hebrew Scriptures ?
The Septuagint did much to make the Hebrew Scriptures readable to Greek - speaking Jews and others .
Just think how thrilling it must have been for them to hear or read God’s Word in what had become their mother tongue !
In time , portions of the Bible were translated into other common languages , such as Syriac , Gothic , and Latin .
As readers considered the Holy Writings in a language they could understand , no doubt many came to have a favorite portion , just as we do today .
( Read Psalm 119 : 162 - 165 . )
Indeed , God’s Word has continued to endure despite changes to the common language .
Why did most people have virtually no access to the Bible in John Wycliffe’s time ?
At times , very powerful forces have tried to keep the Bible from the common people . However , sincere individuals have stood up to such opposition .
For example , consider a 14th - century theologian named John Wycliffe .
He strongly believed that everyone should be able to benefit from God’s Word .
But in his time , the common people in England had virtually no access to the Bible .
Why not ?
For one thing , most could not afford to own a Bible , as copies were handwritten and very expensive to produce .
Moreover , the majority of people were illiterate .
Of course , they may have heard passages read when they went to church .
It is doubtful , though , that they would have understood what they heard . Why ?
Because the official Church Bible ( the Vulgate ) was written in Latin .
Yet , in the Middle Ages , Latin was essentially a dead language among the common people !
How would the Bible’s precious treasures be unlocked for them ? ​ — Prov . 2 : 1 - 5 .
John Wycliffe and others desired to make God’s Word available to everyone .
Do you have such a desire ?
( See paragraph 11 )
What was the impact of the Wycliffe Bible ?
In 1382 , the English translation later known as the Wycliffe Bible was produced .
It quickly gained popularity among followers of Wycliffe .
Desiring to get God’s Word into the mind and heart of ordinary people , itinerant preachers , known as the Lollards , traveled on foot from village to village throughout England .
Often the Lollards read portions of the Wycliffe Bible to those whom they met , and they left handwritten copies behind .
Their efforts marked a real turning point , sparking a renewed interest in God’s Word among the people .
How did the clergy react to Wycliffe and his movement ?
What was the reaction of the clergy ?
They showed hatred for Wycliffe , his Bible , and his followers .
The religious authorities persecuted the Lollards and hunted down and destroyed as many copies of the Wycliffe Bible as they could find .
Even after his death , Wycliffe was declared a heretic .
Of course , it was not possible to punish someone who was no longer alive .
Still , the clergy had Wycliffe’s bones exhumed and burned and the ashes thrown into the river Swift .
But the Church was unable to halt the momentum of God’s Word among those who desired to read and understand it .
In the centuries that followed , many in Europe and other parts of the world began to promote translation and distribution of the Bible for the benefit of the common people .
Of what are we convinced , and how does this strengthen our faith ?
Christians today need not think that the work of translating the Septuagint , Wycliffe’s Bible , the King James Version , or any other translation was inspired by God .
Nevertheless , when we review the history of these and many other translations that have been published , it gives support to this fact : Just as Jehovah promised , his Word has endured .
Does that not strengthen your faith that all the other promises Jehovah has made will likewise come true ? ​ — Josh .
23 : 14 .
How does God’s Word deepen our love for him ?
Besides strengthening our faith , reviewing how the Bible has endured through the ages deepens our love for Jehovah .
* After all , why did he provide his Word in the first place ?
And why did he guarantee that it would survive ? Because he loves us , and he wants to teach us how to benefit ourselves .
( Read Isaiah 48 : 17 , 18 . )
Naturally , it is fitting that we respond to Jehovah’s love by loving him in return and by obeying his commandments . ​ — 1 John 4 : 19 ; 5 : 3 .
What will we consider in the following article ?
It is only sensible to conclude that because we appreciate God’s Word , we will want to derive full benefit from it .
How can we get the most out of our personal Bible reading ?
What can help us to direct attention to the Bible in the ministry ? How can those who teach from the platform make the Scriptures the focus of their teaching ?
We will consider the answers to those questions in the next article .
See the article “ Do You Need to Learn Hebrew and Greek ? ”
in the November 1 , 2009 , issue of The Watchtower .
A number of English idioms can be traced back to the King James Version .
Examples include : “ fell flat on his face , ” “ the skin of my teeth , ” and “ pour out your heart . ” ​ — Num .
22 : 31 ; Job 19 : 20 ; Ps .
62 : 8 .
Note the box “ See It for Yourself ! ”
On April 3 , 2017 , a Bible museum opened at our world headquarters in Warwick , New York , U.S.A .
The permanent gallery of this museum is entitled “ The Bible and the Divine Name . ”
The new museum also includes a rotational gallery that features rare Bibles and Bible - related artifacts .
We invite you to visit the Bible museum and the other museums located at headquarters .
Please go to www.jw.org to make a reservation for your visit .
Look under ABOUT US > OFFICES & TOURS .
“ The word of God is alive and exerts power . ” ​ — HEB .
4 : 12 .
SONGS : 96 , 94
in your personal life ?
in the ministry ?
when teaching from the platform ?
Why can there be no doubt that God’s Word exerts power ?
( See opening picture . )
AS Jehovah’s people , we have no doubt that God’s word , his message to humans , “ is alive and exerts power . ”
Many of us are living proof of the Bible’s power to change lives .
Some of our brothers and sisters were formerly thieves , drug addicts , or sexually immoral .
Others enjoyed a measure of success in this system of things but felt that something was missing in their life .
Time and again , individuals who seemed hopelessly lost found their way to the path of life by means of the Bible’s transforming power .
You have likely read and greatly enjoyed a number of these experiences as published in The Watchtower in the series “ The Bible Changes Lives . ”
And you have seen that even after accepting the truth , Christians continue to make spiritual progress with the help of the Scriptures .
How did God’s Word exert power in the first century ?
Should we be surprised that many in modern times have made remarkable changes as a result of studying God’s Word ? Not at all !
Such experiences remind us of our first - century brothers and sisters , who had the heavenly hope .
( Read 1 Corinthians 6 : 9 - 11 . )
After listing a number of types of people who will not inherit God’s Kingdom , the apostle Paul added : “ That is what some of you were . ”
But they had changed with the help of the Scriptures and of God’s holy spirit .
Even after accepting the truth , some had to overcome serious spiritual problems .
The Bible mentions one anointed Christian in the first century who had to be disfellowshipped ; later , he was reinstated .
Do we not find it encouraging to consider the range of problems that our fellow believers have faced and that they have overcome by means of God’s Word ?
What will we consider in this article ?
Because God’s Word is such a powerful tool and we have it at our disposal , we surely want to make the best use of it .
In this article , we will therefore consider how we may more fully unleash the power of God’s Word ( 1 ) in our personal life , ( 2 ) when we share in the ministry , and ( 3 ) when we teach from the platform .

These reminders will help us to show our love and gratitude to our loving heavenly Father , who teaches us to benefit ourselves . ​ — Isa .
48 : 17 .
( a ) What is needed if God’s Word is to have an effect on us ?
( b ) How do you make time for Bible reading ?
If God’s Word is to have an effect on us , we need to read it regularly ​ — daily if possible .
Of course , most of us lead very busy lives .
Still , we cannot afford to let anything ​ — even legitimate responsibilities — ​ disrupt our Bible reading routine .
( Read Ephesians 5 : 15 , 16 . )
Many of Jehovah’s people have found creative ways to make time for daily Bible reading , whether at the start of their day or at the end or somewhere in between .
They feel as did the psalmist , who wrote : “ How I do love your law ! I ponder over it all day long . ” ​ — Ps .
119 : 97 .
5 , 6 . ( a ) Why is meditation important ?
( b ) How can we meditate effectively ?
( c ) How have you personally benefited from reading God’s Word and meditating on it ?
In addition to reading the Bible , it is important for us to meditate on what we read .
Only then will we be able to make the best personal application of its timeless wisdom .
Whether reading God’s Word in printed or electronic form , our goal should be to get it off the page and into our heart .
How can we meditate effectively ?
Many have found it helpful to pause after reading a portion of the Scriptures and consider such questions as the following : ‘ What does this tell me about Jehovah ?
In what ways am I already applying in my life the principle contained in this portion of God’s Word ?
In what areas could I improve ? ’
As we prayerfully meditate on God’s Word , we will feel motivated to apply its counsel even more fully .
Indeed , we will to a greater extent unleash its power in our own life . ​ — 2 Cor .
10 : 4 , 5 .
How should we make good use of God’s Word in our ministry ?
What can help us to make good use of God’s Word in our ministry ?
A first step is to use it liberally when we preach and teach .
One brother expressed the matter this way , “ If you were preaching from house to house with Jehovah himself , would you do all the talking or would you let him speak ? ”
His point was : When we read directly from God’s Word in the ministry , we are letting Jehovah speak to the householder .
A well - chosen scripture will likely be much more powerful than anything we might say .
Ask yourself , ‘ Do I look for every opportunity to share a portion of God’s Word with those to whom I bring the good news ? ’
Why do we need to do more than merely read scriptures when preaching ? Of course , more is needed than merely reading Bible texts to those we are conversing with .
Why ? Because many have little or no understanding of the Bible . That was true in the first century , and it is true today .
So we should not assume that a person will grasp the point of a verse simply because we read it .
We need to take time to isolate portions of the verse ​ — perhaps rereading key words — ​ and explain their meaning .
Doing so can go a long way in helping the message of God’s Word to reach the mind and heart of our listeners . ​ — Read Luke 24 : 32 .
How can we introduce scriptures in a way that engenders respect for the Bible ?
Give an example .
We also do well to introduce scriptures in a way that engenders respect for the Bible .
For example , we might say , “ Let’s see what our Creator says on this topic . ”
When speaking with someone from a non - Christian background , we could say , “ Notice what the Holy Writings tell us . ”
Or if we are preaching to someone who is secular - minded , we might ask , “ Have you ever heard this ancient proverb ? ”
Yes , we consider each person as an individual and adapt our approach accordingly . ​ — 1 Cor .
9 : 22 , 23 .
( a ) Relate the experience one brother had . ( b ) How have you witnessed the power of God’s Word in your ministry ?
Many have found that using God’s Word in the ministry can have a profound impact on those to whom they preach .

Consider an example .
A brother made a return visit on an elderly gentleman who had read our magazines for a number of years .
Instead of simply presenting the latest issue of The Watchtower , the brother decided to read a scripture found in that issue .
He read 2 Corinthians 1 : 3 , 4 , which says : “ The Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort . . . comforts us in all our trials . ”
The householder was so moved by those words that he asked our brother to read the scripture a second time .
The man mentioned how much he and his wife needed comfort , and he now showed interest in the Bible’s message .
Would you not agree that God’s Word exerts power in our ministry ? ​ — Acts 19 : 20 .
What responsibility do brothers who teach from the platform have ?
We all enjoy attending our Christian meetings as well as assemblies and conventions . Primarily , we attend to worship Jehovah .
We also derive great benefit from the spiritual instruction we receive .
Brothers who speak from the platform on these occasions enjoy a great privilege . At the same time , they should recognize that they have a weighty responsibility .
They must always make sure that what they teach is solidly based on God’s Word .
If you are assigned to teach from the platform , how can you unleash the power of the Bible in your presentation ?
How can a speaker make sure that the Scriptures form the backbone of his talk ?
Make sure that the Scriptures form the backbone of your talk .
What does that involve ?
For one thing , be careful that nothing ​ — experiences , illustrations , or even your manner of delivery — ​ overshadows or draws attention away from the Bible verses you use .
Also , remember that simply reading a number of scriptures does not in itself constitute teaching from the Bible .
In fact , using too many scriptures could result in none of them standing out in the mind of your listeners .
So select your key scriptures carefully , and take time to read , explain , illustrate , and apply them well .
When a talk is based on an outline provided by the organization , study the outline and the scriptures it uses .
Try to understand the connection between the statements in the outline and the cited scriptures .
Then use selected scriptures to teach the points in the outline .
( You can find practical suggestions in studies 21 to 23 of Benefit From Theocratic Ministry School Education . )
Above all , prayerfully ask for Jehovah’s help to convey the precious thoughts contained in his Word . ​ — Read Ezra 7 : 10 ; Proverbs 3 : 13 , 14 .
( a ) How was one sister affected by the use of scriptures at a Christian meeting ?
( b ) How have you benefited from Scriptural teaching presented at our meetings ?
A sister in Australia was deeply affected by the use of scriptures at a Christian meeting .
Despite having had a tragic upbringing , she had responded to the Bible’s message and had dedicated her life to Jehovah .
Even so , she found it a challenge to accept Jehovah’s love for her .
In time , though , she became convinced that God loved her .
What helped her to reach that conclusion ?
A turning point came when she meditated on a scripture that was used at one of our meetings and that she connected with other Bible verses .
* Have you similarly been affected by the use of God’s Word at meetings , assemblies , and conventions ? ​ — Neh .
8 : 12 .
How can we show our appreciation for Jehovah’s Word ?
Are we not grateful to Jehovah for his written Word , the Bible ?
He not only lovingly provided it for the human family but also fulfilled his promise that it would endure .
Surely , we do well to read God’s Word regularly , apply it in our own life , and use it when helping others .
We thereby show our love and appreciation not only for this divine treasure but , most important , for its Author , Jehovah God .
See the box “ A Turning Point . ”
Read it regularly
Meditate on it
Apply what you learn
Make liberal use of the Scriptures
Isolate and explain key portions of a passage
Introduce texts in a way that increases respect for God’s Word
Make the Scriptures the backbone of your talk
Do not let experiences , illustrations , or your delivery overshadow the Bible
Take time to explain , illustrate , and apply verses that you read
For many years after learning the truth , Victoria struggled to accept that God could love her .
How was she finally helped to begin feeling truly loved by God ?
Victoria relates :
“ A turning point came about 15 years after I was baptized .
During a talk at the Kingdom Hall . . . , the speaker referred to James 1 : 23 , 24 .
Those verses liken God’s Word to a mirror in which we can see ourselves the way Jehovah sees us .
I began to wonder if what I saw in myself was different from what Jehovah saw .
At first , I resisted this new idea .
I still felt that loving me was too much to expect of Jehovah .
“ A few days later , I read a scripture that changed my life .
The verse was Isaiah 1 : 18 , where Jehovah is quoted as saying : ‘ Come , now , you people , and let us set matters straight between us . . . .
Though the sins of you people should prove to be as scarlet , they will be made white just like snow . ’
I felt as if Jehovah were speaking to me , saying : ‘ Come on , Vicky , let’s set matters straight between us .
I know you , I know your sins , I know your heart ​ — and I love you . ’
“ I was unable to sleep that night .
I still doubted that Jehovah could love me , but I began thinking about Jesus ’ ransom sacrifice .
All of a sudden , it dawned on me that Jehovah had been patient with me for so long , showing me that he loved me in so many ways .
Yet , I was , in effect , saying to him : ‘ Your love is not great enough to reach me .
Your Son’s sacrifice is not enough to cover me . ’
It was as if I had been throwing the ransom back at Jehovah .
But now , at last , by meditating on this gift of the ransom , I began to feel loved by Jehovah . ”
3 Life Story ​ — Blessings Come From Doing What Jehovah Asks
7 “ Love . . . in Deed and Truth ”
Genuine love identifies true Christians .
This article will consider nine ways that we can show love that is “ free from hypocrisy . ” ​ — 2 Cor .
6 : 6 .
12 The Truth Brings , “ Not Peace , But a Sword ”
The negative response of unbelieving relatives to the truth can make life difficult for Jehovah’s people .
In this article , we will learn how we can successfully deal with the challenges of family opposition .
17 Joseph of Arimathea Takes a Stand
21 Visions of Zechariah ​ — How They Affect You
26 Chariots and a Crown Safeguard You
These articles discuss Zechariah’s sixth , seventh , and eighth visions .
The sixth and seventh visions will help us appreciate the privilege we have to serve in God’s clean organization .
The eighth vision will teach us how Jehovah provides secure protection in order for his worshippers to engage in true worship .
31 One Act of Christian Kindness
32 Did You Know ?
LIFE STORY
As told by Olive Matthews
“ We’ll do that ! ” This is how my husband and I , along with my brother and his wife , responded to an invitation to take up an assignment .
Why did we accept it , and how did Jehovah bless us ?
First , let me tell you about my background .

I WAS born in 1923 in Hemsworth , a town in Yorkshire , England .
I had one older brother , Bob .
When I was about nine years old , our father , who disliked religious hypocrisy , obtained some books exposing false religion .
He was very impressed by what he read .
A few years later , Bob Atkinson called at our house and played a phonograph record of one of Brother Rutherford’s talks .
We realized that this came from the same group that published those books !
My parents suggested that Brother Atkinson have his evening meal with us every night and answer our many Bible questions .
We were invited to attend meetings at a brother’s home a few miles away .


We quickly responded , and a small congregation was formed in Hemsworth .

Soon we were accommodating zone servants ( now known as circuit overseers ) and inviting nearby pioneers for meals .
Association with them really left an impression on me .
We had begun setting up a business , but Father said to my brother , “ If you want to go pioneering , we’ll get rid of this . ”
Bob agreed , and he left home to pioneer at age 21 .
Two years later , when I was 16 , I was appointed as a pioneer .
Apart from weekends , I worked mostly alone , using a testimony card and a phonograph .

But Jehovah blessed me with a Bible student who made wonderful progress .
Many in that student’s family eventually accepted the truth .
The following year , I was appointed as a special pioneer , along with Mary Henshall .
We were sent to unassigned territory in the county of Cheshire .
It was now the middle of World War II , and women were directed to assist in the war effort .
As full - time ministers , we special pioneers expected to receive the same exemption as other religious ministers .
But the courts did not agree , so I was sentenced to 31 days in prison .
The following year when I turned 19 , I registered as a conscientious objector .
I was brought before two tribunal courts , but my case was dismissed .
All through this experience , I knew that holy spirit was helping me and that Jehovah was holding my hand , making me firm and strong . ​ — Isa .
41 : 10 , 13 .
Arthur Matthews and I met in 1946 .

Having just served a three - month prison sentence as a conscientious objector , he joined his brother Dennis , a special pioneer , in Hemsworth .
They had been taught about Jehovah from infancy by their father and got baptized as teenagers .
Very soon Dennis was assigned to Ireland , leaving Arthur without a partner .
Impressed with the way this young , hardworking pioneer conducted himself , my parents invited Arthur to stay with them .
When I visited , Arthur and I would volunteer to wash the dishes after meals .
Eventually we began writing to each other .
During 1948 , Arthur received another three - month prison sentence .
We married in January 1949 with the goal of staying in full - time service as long as possible .
With Jehovah’s blessing and careful management , we used vacation time to earn some money picking fruit , so we were able to continue pioneering .


In Hemsworth shortly after our wedding in 1949
Just over a year later , we were asked to go to Northern Ireland , first to Armagh and then to Newry , both mostly Catholic towns .


Tension in the area was high , and we had to be very cautious and discerning when talking with people .
Meetings were held in a brother and sister’s home that was ten miles ( 16 km ) away from where we lived .
About eight attended .

When invited to stay the night , we would sleep on the floor and enjoy a hearty breakfast the next day .
It is a great joy to know that there are now many Witnesses in that area .
My brother and his wife , Lottie , were already serving as special pioneers in Northern Ireland , and in 1952 the four of us attended a district convention in Belfast .
A brother kindly accommodated all of us , together with Pryce Hughes , then the branch servant in Britain .
One night we discussed the release of the booklet God’s Way Is Love , produced especially with Ireland in mind .
Brother Hughes spoke of the difficulty in reaching Catholic people in the Irish Republic .
Brothers were being put out of their accommodations and facing mob violence instigated by the priests .
“ We need couples with cars , ” Pryce said , “ to engage in a special campaign to distribute the booklet throughout the country . ”
* Our immediate response was , “ We’ll do that ! ”
Hence , the comment made at the beginning of this story .
With fellow pioneers on a motorcycle and sidecar
One place where pioneers could always stay in Dublin was at the home of Ma Rutland , a longtime faithful sister .

After a stop there and after selling some belongings , the four of us piled onto Bob’s motorcycle and sidecar and went in search of an automobile .

We found a suitable secondhand car and asked the seller to deliver it to us , since none of us could drive .
Arthur spent that evening sitting on the bed , going through imaginary gearshift movements .
The next morning while he was attempting to drive the car out of the garage , missionary Mildred Willett ( who later married John Barr ) came by .
She could drive !
Now on the road and with a little more practice , we were ready to go !
Our car and camper trailer
Next , we needed accommodations .
We had been cautioned to avoid living in a trailer because opposers might set it on fire , so we searched for a home , but in vain .
That night the four of us slept in the car .
The next day , all we could find was a little homemade trailer with two small bunk beds .
That became our home .
Amazingly , we had no problem parking the trailer on the property of friendly farmers .
We covered territory that was 10 to 15 miles ( 16 to 24 km ) away .

Then after moving on , we would return and call on those in the area where we had been parked .
We visited all the homes in the southeast of the Republic without much trouble at all , distributing over 20,000 booklets and passing on to the Britain branch office the names of interested people .
What a blessing it is to have hundreds of Witnesses there now !
In time , we were reassigned to south London .
Within a few weeks , Arthur received a call from the Britain branch office asking him to begin circuit work the next day !
After a week’s training , we traveled to our circuit in Scotland .
Arthur had no extra time to prepare his talks , but his readiness to meet challenges in Jehovah’s service was of great encouragement to me .
We really enjoyed our assignment in the circuit work .
We had been in unassigned territory for some years , and now it was a wonderful blessing to be among so many brothers and sisters .
When Arthur received an invitation to attend the 1962 ten - month course at Gilead School , we had a big decision to make .
We came to the conclusion that even though I was to be left behind , it was right for Arthur to accept this privilege .
As I was to be without a partner , I was sent back to Hemsworth as a special pioneer .

When Arthur returned a year later , we were assigned to the district work and covered Scotland , northern England , and Northern Ireland .
In 1964 , Arthur received a new assignment as branch servant in the Irish Republic .
We had greatly enjoyed the traveling work , so at first I felt very apprehensive about the change .
Looking back , now I am grateful to have been given the privilege of serving at Bethel .
I believe that if you accept an assignment even when you don’t really feel like doing it , you will always be blessed by Jehovah .
My days were filled with office duties , packing literature , cooking , and cleaning .
For some time , we were also in district work and were able to meet brothers throughout the country .
This , along with seeing our Bible students make progress , created a strong bond with our spiritual family in Ireland .


What a blessing !
The first international convention in Ireland was held in Dublin in 1965 .
* Despite intense opposition on all fronts , the convention was a great success .
A total of 3,948 attended , and 65 got baptized .
Everyone who had provided accommodations for the 3,500 international delegates received a letter of appreciation .
Householders , in turn , praised the delegates ’ conduct .
It was indeed a turning point for Ireland .
Arthur greeting Nathan Knorr on his arrival for the 1965 convention
Arthur releases My Book of Bible Stories in Gaelic in 1983
In 1966 both north and south Ireland were united under the Dublin branch office ​ — a sharp contrast to the political and religious divisions on the island .
We were thrilled to see so many Catholics coming into the truth and serving alongside brothers who were once Protestants .
In 2011 our lives changed completely when the Britain and Ireland branches were merged and we were assigned to London Bethel .
The news came at a time when I was beginning to be concerned about Arthur’s health .
He was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease .
On May 20 , 2015 , my companion of 66 years passed away in death .
In the last few years , I have felt heartbreak , depression , and grief .
In the past , Arthur had always been there for me .
How I miss him !
But when you go through these kinds of situations , you draw closer to Jehovah .
It has also been heartwarming to learn how much Arthur was loved .
I have received letters from friends in Ireland , Britain , and even the United States .
These letters , along with encouragement from Arthur’s brother Dennis , his wife , Mavis , and my nieces Ruth and Judy , have helped me more than words can express .
A scripture that has greatly encouraged me is Isaiah 30 : 18 .
It says : “ Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor , and he will rise up to show you mercy .
For Jehovah is a God of justice .
Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him . ”
I have found it truly comforting to know that Jehovah is waiting patiently to remedy matters and to give us exciting assignments in his new world .
Looking back on our lives , I can see how Jehovah has guided and blessed the work in Ireland !
I feel very privileged to have had a small share in that spiritual growth .
It is undoubtedly true that doing what Jehovah asks of us always brings blessings .
See the 1988 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses , pp . 101 - 102 .
See the 1988 Yearbook , pp . 109 - 112 .
“ We should love , not in word or with the tongue , but in deed and truth . ” ​ — 1 JOHN 3 : 18 .
SONGS : 106 , 100
What is the highest form of love ?
What is “ love free from hypocrisy ” ?
How can we be sure that our love is genuine ?
What is the highest form of love , and why is that so ?

( See opening image . )
LOVE based on right principles ( a·gaʹpe ) is a gift from Jehovah .
He is its Source .
This kind of love is the highest form of love .
While it can include affection and warmth , it is primarily identified by unselfish actions for the good of others .
According to one reference work , a·gaʹpe “ can be known only from the actions it prompts . ”
When we show or are shown unselfish love , our lives are enriched , being filled with joy and meaning .
2 , 3 .
How has Jehovah shown unselfish love for humans ?
Jehovah showed love for humans even before he created Adam and Eve .
He made the earth to be man’s everlasting home , a place where man does not just survive but enjoys life to the full .
Jehovah did this solely for our benefit , not for personal gain .
He further showed unselfish love by blessing his children on earth with the prospect of living forever in the Paradise that he had prepared for them .
After Adam and Eve rebelled , Jehovah made his greatest expression of unselfish love .
He arranged to ransom the future descendants of those two rebels , certain that some of them would respond favorably to His love .
In fact , from the moment that Jehovah promised a future Savior , He viewed this sacrifice as already made .
Then , some 4,000 years later , Jehovah at great personal cost sacrificed his only - begotten Son for the world of mankind .
How grateful we are for Jehovah’s unselfish love !
What indicates that imperfect humans are able to show unselfish love ?
We are able to show unselfish love because God created us in his image .
Inherited sin has made it challenging for us to manifest love , but it has not removed our ability to do so .
Abel showed love for God by unselfishly offering the best of what he had .
Noah displayed unselfish love for his fellow man by preaching God’s message for decades despite not seeing any response from the people .
Abraham put his love for God ahead of his own feelings when he was commanded to offer up his son Isaac .
Like those faithful men , we want to show love , despite the challenges we face .
In what ways can we show genuine love ?
The Bible explains that genuine love is shown , “ not in word or with the tongue , but in deed and truth . ”
Does this mean that we cannot express love through our speech ?
Not at all !
Rather , it means that our love must not be limited to words , especially when the circumstances call for action .

For example , when a fellow Christian lacks the basic necessities of life , he needs more than our good wishes .
Similarly , love for Jehovah and our neighbor moves us not only to ask God ‘ to send out workers into the harvest ’ but also to have a full share in the preaching work . ​ — Matt .
9 : 38 .
6 , 7 . ( a ) What is “ love free from hypocrisy ” ?
( b ) What are some examples of counterfeit love ?
The apostle John wrote that we must love “ in deed and truth . ”
Thus , our love must be “ without hypocrisy , ” or “ free from hypocrisy . ”
This means that we cannot show genuine love while pretending to be something that we are not , as if we were wearing a mask .
We might wonder , ‘ Is there such a thing as love with hypocrisy ? ’
Not really . This would not be love at all but a worthless imitation .
Consider some examples of counterfeit love .
In the garden of Eden , Satan pretended to be looking out for Eve’s best interests , but his actions were actually selfish and hypocritical .
In David’s day , Ahithophel proved that his friendship with the king was a fraud .
Ahithophel turned traitor when he felt that he would gain an advantage .
Likewise today , apostates and others who create divisions in the congregation use “ smooth talk and flattering speech ” to make themselves appear to be loving , but their true motive is selfish . ​ — Rom .
16 : 17 , 18 .
What question should we ask ourselves ?
Hypocritical love is especially shameful because it is a counterfeit of the godly quality of self - sacrificing love .
Such hypocrisy might fool men , but not Jehovah .
In fact , Jesus said that those who are like hypocrites would be punished “ with the greatest severity . ”
Of course , Jehovah’s servants would never want to display hypocritical love .
However , we do well to ask ourselves , ‘ Is my love always genuine , not tainted by selfishness or deception ? ’
Let us consider nine ways we can strive to show love that is “ free from hypocrisy . ”
What will genuine love move us to do ?
Be happy to serve in the background .
We should be willing to perform acts of love for our brothers “ in secret , ” or out of the limelight , when this is possible .
( Read Matthew 6 : 1 - 4 . )
Ananias and Sapphira failed to do that .
Not content to donate anonymously , they blatantly exaggerated their offering and suffered disaster for their hypocrisy .
In contrast , genuine love moves us to find joy in serving our brothers without fanfare or recognition .
For instance , the brothers who support the Governing Body in helping to prepare spiritual food do so anonymously , not drawing attention to themselves or revealing the material they have worked on .
How can we take the lead in showing honor to others ?
Take the lead in showing honor to others .
( Read Romans 12 : 10 . )
Jesus set the pattern in honoring others by performing the lowliest of tasks .
We may have to work hard to develop the humility needed to show honor to others in this way .
Even the apostles could not fully understand Jesus ’ actions until they received holy spirit .
We can show honor to others by not thinking too much of ourselves because of our education , material possessions , or privileges in Jehovah’s service .
And rather than envying those who receive praise , we rejoice with them even if we feel that we deserve equal honor or a share of the credit for what was done .
Why must our commendation be sincere ?
Commend your brothers sincerely .
We should seize opportunities to commend one another because such expressions are “ good for building up . ”
However , we must be sincere .

Otherwise , we could actually be flattering the person or avoiding our responsibility to provide needed counsel .

To commend someone but then tear him down behind his back is a form of hypocrisy .
The apostle Paul avoided that trap and set a fine example in showing genuine love in the way he commended others .
For example , he sincerely commended the Christians in Corinth regarding some aspects of their conduct .
But when their actions did not deserve commendation , he explained the reason to them kindly and clearly . ​ — 1 Cor .
11 : 20 - 22 .
Giving to our brothers in need is one way to show our love and hospitality ( See paragraph 12 )
How can we show genuine love when we offer hospitality ?
Be hospitable .
Jehovah commands us to be generous toward our brothers and sisters .
( Read 1 John 3 : 17 . )
Yet , we must do so with a pure motive , avoiding any trace of selfishness .
We can ask ourselves : ‘ Do I offer hospitality primarily to close friends , prominent ones , or those who might be able to return a favor somehow ?
Or do I instead look for ways to be generous toward brothers and sisters whom I do not know well or who have nothing with which to repay me ? ’
Or suppose a fellow Christian falls into need because of poor planning or fails to thank us for our hospitality .
In such situations , we should apply the counsel : “ Be hospitable to one another without grumbling . ”
If you follow this advice , you will gain the reward of happiness that comes from giving with the right motive . ​ — Acts 20 : 35 .
( a ) When can it be especially challenging to help those who are weak ?
( b ) What practical things can we do to support the weak ?
Support those who are weak .
The genuineness of our love can be tested by the Bible’s command to “ support the weak , be patient toward all . ”
Although many who are weak later become strong in the faith , others need our patient , ongoing support .
This can include sharing upbuilding Scriptural thoughts , inviting them to join us in the ministry , or just taking time to listen to them .
In addition , instead of simply thinking that a brother or a sister is either “ strong ” or “ weak , ” we should recognize that we all have strengths and weaknesses .

Even the apostle Paul acknowledged his own weaknesses .
Thus , we can all benefit from the support of fellow Christians .
How far should we be willing to go to maintain peace with our brothers ?
Make peace .
We do everything in our power to maintain peace with our brothers , even when we feel that we have been misunderstood or treated unfairly .
( Read Romans 12 : 17 , 18 . )
An apology can help to repair hurt feelings , but it must be sincere .
For instance , rather than saying , “ I’m sorry that you feel that way , ” you could admit your role in the problem by saying , “ I’m sorry that I hurt you by what I said . ”
Peace is especially vital in a marriage .
A husband and a wife should not pretend to love each other in public but then use the silent treatment , cruel words , or physical violence to hurt each other in private .
How can we show that our forgiveness is genuine ?
Forgive freely .
We forgive by pardoning someone who has offended us and by letting go of our resentment toward him .
By “ putting up with one another in love , earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace , ” we can freely forgive those who may not be aware that they offended us .
For our forgiveness to be genuine , we must control our thinking so that we do “ not keep account of the injury . ”
If we were to harbor resentment or hold a grudge , we would risk permanently damaging our relationship not only with our brother or sister but also with Jehovah .
We can also demonstrate our sincere forgiveness by praying for those who sin against us . ​ — Luke 6 : 27 , 28 .
How should we view privileges in Jehovah’s service ?
Sacrifice personal advantages .
If we receive privileges in Jehovah’s service , we should view these as opportunities to show the genuineness of our love by “ seeking , not [ our ] own advantage , but that of the other person . ”
For example , at our assemblies and conventions , attendants are on duty in the seating area before others are scheduled to enter .
Instead of viewing their assignment as an opportunity to get the best seats for themselves and their families , many of these brothers choose to sit in less favorable seats within their assigned section .
By sacrificing their personal advantage in this way , they demonstrate love that is free of any trace of selfishness .
How might you imitate their good example ?
What will genuine love move a person to do if he has committed a serious sin ?
Confess and abandon secret sins .
Some Christians who have committed a serious sin try to cover it over in order to avoid embarrassing themselves or disappointing others .
Yet , such a course is unloving , for it harms not only the sinner but also others .
It can hinder the flow of God’s spirit and threaten the peace of the entire congregation .
Genuine love moves Christians who have committed serious sins to speak to the elders so that the elders can provide the needed help . ​ — Jas . 5 : 14 , 15 .
How important is genuine love ?
Love is the greatest of all qualities .
It identifies us as Jesus ’ followers and as imitators of Jehovah , the Source of love .
“ If I . . . do not have love , ” wrote Paul , “ I am nothing . ”
May we continue to show our love not just “ in word ” but also “ in deed and truth . ”
“ Do not think I came to bring peace to the earth ; I came to bring , not peace , but a sword . ” ​ — MATT .
10 : 34 .
SONGS : 123 , 128
What is the “ sword ” that Jesus said he would bring ?
How can you maintain your loyalty to Jehovah if your relatives oppose true worship ?
What can help you to cope if a family member leaves Jehovah ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What peace can we enjoy now ?
( b ) What prevents us from finding complete peace at this time ?
( See opening image . )
WE ALL want peaceful lives , free from anxiety .
How thankful we are that Jehovah grants us “ the peace of God , ” an inner calm that can protect us from disturbing thoughts and feelings !
Because of our dedication to Jehovah , we also enjoy “ peace with God , ” a good relationship with him . ​ — Rom .
5 : 1 .
However , God’s time to bring about complete peace has not yet come .
These critical last days are filled with conflict , and countless people have contentious attitudes .
As Christians , we must wage a spiritual war against Satan and the false teachings that he promotes .
But the greatest threat to our peace may come from unbelieving relatives .
Some might ridicule our beliefs , accuse us of dividing the family , or threaten to disown us unless we give up our faith .
How should we view family opposition ?
How can we successfully deal with the challenges it brings ?
3 , 4 . ( a ) What effect do Jesus ’ teachings have ?
( b ) When would it be especially challenging to follow Jesus ?
Jesus knew that his teachings would divide people and that those who follow him would need courage to do so in the face of opposition .
This opposition could affect peaceful relations among family members .
Jesus said : “ Do not think I came to bring peace to the earth ; I came to bring , not peace , but a sword .
For I came to cause division , with a man against his father , and a daughter against her mother , and a daughter - in - law against her mother - in - law .
Indeed , a man’s enemies will be those of his own household . ” ​ — Matt .
10 : 34 - 36 .
In saying “ Do not think I came to bring peace , ” Jesus meant that some of his listeners needed to think about the consequences of following him .
His message could divide people . Of course , Jesus ’ motive was to proclaim God’s message of truth , not to damage relationships .
Still , holding faithfully to Christ’s teachings would be challenging if one’s close friends or family members rejected the truth .
What have Jesus ’ followers experienced ?
Jesus included the pain of family opposition as part of the suffering that his followers must be willing to endure .
In order to prove worthy of the Christ , his disciples have had to endure ridicule or even alienation from their families .
Yet , they have gained far more than they have lost . ​ — Read Mark 10 : 29 , 30 .
What must we remember if our relatives oppose our efforts to worship Jehovah ?
Even when our relatives oppose our efforts to worship Jehovah , we continue to love them , but we must remember that our love for God and Christ comes first .
We must also realize that Satan will try to use our affection for our family to break our integrity .
Let us consider some situations involving family opposition and see how we can successfully face the challenges that these bring .
How should those with an unbelieving mate view their situation ?
The Bible warns that those who marry “ will have tribulation in their flesh . ”
If you have an unbelieving mate , you may experience more than the usual stress and anxiety in your marriage .

Nevertheless , it is important for you to view your situation as Jehovah does .
Your mate’s present unwillingness to follow Christ is not in itself a valid reason for separation or divorce .
Although an unbelieving husband may not take the lead in spiritual matters , he should be respected because of his position as the head of the family .
Likewise , an unbelieving wife should be shown self - sacrificing love and tender affection by her Christian husband . ​ — Eph .
5 : 22 , 23 , 28 , 29 .
What questions can you ask yourself if your spouse tries to limit your worship ?
What if your spouse tries to limit your worship ?
For example , one sister was told by her husband to share in the field ministry only on certain days of the week .
If you face a similar situation , ask yourself : ‘ Is my spouse demanding that I stop worshipping my God ?
If not , can I yield to the request ? ’
Being reasonable can help you to avoid needless marital conflict . ​ — Phil .
4 : 5 .
How can Christians teach their children to honor an unbelieving parent ?
Training children can be especially challenging if you have an unbelieving mate .
For instance , you need to teach your children to obey the Bible’s command : “ Honor your father and your mother . ”
But what if your mate does not follow the Bible’s high standard of conduct ?
Set the example by honoring your mate .
Focus on his or her good qualities , and express appreciation for your mate .
Avoid saying negative things about your mate in front of your children .
Instead , explain to them that each person must choose whether to serve Jehovah .
The children’s good conduct might help to draw the unbelieving parent to true worship .
Teach your children Bible truth whenever possible ( See paragraph 10 )
How can Christian parents teach their children Bible truth in a religiously divided household ?
At times , unbelieving mates will demand that children share in pagan celebrations or be taught false religious beliefs .
Some husbands may forbid the Christian wife to teach the children from the Bible .
Even so , a Christian wife does what she can to teach the children Bible truth .
For example , the husband of a Witness wife might not allow her to conduct a formal Bible study with her minor children or to take them with her to Christian meetings .
While respecting his decisions , she can still express her faith in the presence of her children as opportunities arise , thus giving them moral training and knowledge about Jehovah .
Of course , her children must eventually make their own decision regarding worship . ​ — Deut .
30 : 19 , 20 .
*
What may cause a problem with non - Witness relatives ?
At first , we may not have told our family about our association with Jehovah’s Witnesses .
As our faith grew , though , we saw the need to be open about our beliefs .
If your courageous stand has resulted in a problem between you and your non - Witness relatives , consider some steps to take to reduce conflict and still maintain integrity .
Why may unbelieving relatives oppose us , but how can we show them empathy ?
Have empathy for unbelieving relatives .
While we may be overjoyed about the Bible truths we have learned , our relatives may mistakenly believe that we have been tricked or have become part of a cult .
They may think that we no longer love them because we do not celebrate holidays with them .
They may even fear for our eternal welfare .

We should show empathy by trying to see things from their viewpoint and by listening carefully to discern their real concerns .
The apostle Paul endeavored to understand “ people of all sorts ” in order to share the good news with them , and a similar approach can help us as well . ​ — 1 Cor .
9 : 19 - 23 .
How should we speak with unbelieving relatives ?
Speak with mildness .
“ Let your words always be gracious , ” says the Bible .
We can ask Jehovah for his holy spirit so that we can display its fruitage when speaking with our relatives .
We should not try to argue about all their false religious ideas .
If they hurt us by their speech or actions , we can imitate the example of the apostles .
Paul wrote : “ When insulted , we bless ; when persecuted , we patiently endure ; when slandered , we answer mildly . ” ​ — 1 Cor .
4 : 12 , 13 .
What are the benefits of maintaining fine conduct ?
Maintain fine conduct .
Although mild speech is helpful in dealing with opposing relatives , our good conduct can speak even louder .
( Read 1 Peter 3 : 1 , 2 , 16 . )
By your example , let your relatives see that Jehovah’s Witnesses enjoy happy marriages , look after their children , and live a clean , moral , and fulfilling life .
Even if our relatives never accept the truth , we can have the joy that comes from pleasing Jehovah by our faithful course .
How can we plan ahead for situations that might lead to conflict ?
Plan ahead .
Think of situations that might lead to conflict , and determine how to handle them .
A sister from Australia relates : “ My father - in - law strongly opposed the truth .
Before calling to check on him , my husband and I would pray that Jehovah help us not to respond in kind to angry reactions .
We would prepare topics to discuss so that we could keep the conversation friendly .
To avoid long conversations that would usually lead to a heated discussion about religion , we set a time limit for the visit . ”
How can you overcome feelings of guilt about displeasing your relatives ?
Of course , you cannot expect to avoid all disagreements with your unbelieving relatives .
Such conflict can make you feel guilty , especially because you love your relatives dearly and have always tried to please them .
If you feel this way , strive to put your loyalty to Jehovah ahead of your love for your family .
Such a stand may actually help your relatives to see that applying Bible truth is a life - and - death matter .
In any case , remember that you cannot force others to accept the truth . Instead , let them see in you the benefits of following Jehovah’s ways .
Our loving God offers to them , just as he does to us , the opportunity to choose the course they will follow . ​ — Isa .
48 : 17 , 18 .
17 , 18 .
What can help you to cope if a family member leaves Jehovah ?
When a family member is disfellowshipped or he disassociates himself from the congregation , it can feel like the stab of a sword .
How can you cope with the pain that this brings ?
Keep up your spiritual routine .
Build yourself up by regularly reading the Bible , preparing for and attending Christian meetings , sharing in the field ministry , and praying for the strength to endure .
But what if you feel that your heart is not in your activity , that you are just going through the motions ?
Do not give up !
A good spiritual routine can help you to gain control of your thoughts and feelings .
Consider the experience of the writer of Psalm 73 .
He had developed a wrong viewpoint and had become greatly troubled , but he was able to correct his thinking when he entered God’s place of worship .
Your faithfully worshipping Jehovah can help you to do the same .
How can you show respect for Jehovah’s arrangement for discipline ?
Respect the discipline of Jehovah .
His arrangement can bring the best long - term outcome for all , including the wrongdoer , even though the immediate effect is painful .
( Read Hebrews 12 : 11 . )
For example , Jehovah instructs us to “ stop keeping company ” with unrepentant wrongdoers .
Despite our pain of heart , we must avoid normal contact with a disfellowshipped family member by telephone , text messages , letters , e - mails , or social media .

What hope can we maintain ?
Maintain hope .
Love “ hopes all things , ” including that those who have left Jehovah will come back to him .
If you see evidence that a close family member is having a change of heart , you could pray that he or she gain strength from the Scriptures and respond to Jehovah’s appeal : “ Return to me . ” ​ — Isa .
44 : 22 .
What should you do if you experience family division because you are following Jesus ?
Jesus said that if we were to put any human before him , we would not be worthy of him .
Yet , he was confident that his disciples would have the courage to maintain their loyalty to him despite family opposition .
If following Jesus has brought “ a sword ” into your family , rely on Jehovah to help you deal with the challenges successfully .
Find joy in knowing that Jehovah and Jesus are pleased with you and that they will reward your faithful course .
For more information on training children in a religiously divided household , see “ Questions From Readers ” in The Watchtower , August 15 , 2002 .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
One of the many metropolitan witnessing stands in Lagos , the most populous city in Africa .
At this one location , an average of six Bible studies are requested every month
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
JOSEPH OF ARIMATHEA hardly knew how he had found the courage to approach the Roman governor .
Pontius Pilate was known to be extremely stubborn .
Yet , if Jesus was to receive a dignified burial , someone would have to ask Pilate to release the body .
As it turned out , the face - to - face meeting was not as difficult as Joseph may have imagined .
After ascertaining from an officer that Jesus was dead , Pilate granted the request .
So now Joseph , his heart still heavy , hurried back to the execution site . ​ — Mark 15 : 42 - 45 .
Who was this Joseph of Arimathea ?
What connection did he have with Jesus ?
And what makes his story worthy of your interest ?
The inspired Gospel of Mark calls Joseph “ a reputable member of the Council . ”
In context , the Council can only be the Sanhedrin , the Jewish high court and supreme administrative body .
Joseph was therefore one of the leaders of his people , which explains how he could gain an audience with the Roman governor .

It is no surprise that Joseph was also rich . ​ — Matt .
27 : 57 .
Do you have the courage to acknowledge Jesus as your King ?
As a group , the Sanhedrin was hostile to Jesus .
Its members connived to have him put to death .
Joseph , however , is called “ a good and righteous man . ”
Unlike most of his Sanhedrin colleagues , he lived an honest , moral life and did his best to obey God’s commands .
He was also “ waiting for the Kingdom of God , ” which may explain why he became one of Jesus ’ disciples .
Likely , he was attracted to Jesus ’ message out of a sincere desire for truth and justice .

John 19 : 38 says that Joseph “ was a disciple of Jesus but a secret one because of his fear of the Jews . ”
What was Joseph afraid of ?
He knew of the Jews ’ disdain for Jesus and their determination to expel from the synagogue any who confessed faith in him .
Being expelled from the synagogue meant being scorned , shunned , and treated as an outcast by fellow Jews .
So Joseph hesitated to confess his faith in Jesus openly . Doing so would mean losing his position and his prestige .
Joseph was not the only one in this predicament .
According to John 12 : 42 , “ many even of the rulers actually put faith in [ Jesus ] , but they would not acknowledge him because of the Pharisees , so that they would not be expelled from the synagogue . ”
Another individual in the same situation was Nicodemus , also a member of the Sanhedrin . ​ — John 3 : 1 - 10 ; 7 : 50 - 52 .
Joseph , though , was a disciple , but he could not bring himself to say so openly .
That was a serious problem , particularly in the light of Jesus ’ pronouncement : “ Everyone . . . who acknowledges me before men , I will also acknowledge him before my Father who is in the heavens .
But whoever disowns me before men , I will also disown him before my Father who is in the heavens . ”
Joseph did not exactly disown Jesus , but neither did he have the courage to acknowledge him .
Do you ?
To Joseph’s credit , the Bible reports that he did not support the Sanhedrin’s plot against Jesus .
Perhaps , as some suggest , Joseph was not present at Jesus ’ trial .
Whatever the case , Joseph must have felt wretched about that dreadful perversion of justice ​ — but he could do nothing to stop it !
By the time of Jesus ’ death , Joseph had evidently overcome his fears , and he decided to throw in his lot with Jesus ’ followers .
That decision is indicated by the words of Mark 15 : 43 : “ He took courage and went in before Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus . ”
It seems that Joseph was present when Jesus died .
Indeed , he knew of Jesus ’ death before Pilate did .
Thus , when Joseph asked for the body , the governor “ wondered whether [ Jesus ] could already be dead . ”
If Joseph had witnessed Jesus ’ agony on the torture stake , did that awful scene move him to examine his conscience and finally decide that he ought to take a stand for truth ?
It is possible . At the very least , Joseph was now stirred to action .
He would be a secret disciple no more .
Jewish law required that those sentenced to death be buried before sundown .
As far as the Romans were concerned , though , the bodies of executed criminals either were left on the stake to rot or were thrown into a common grave .
But that is not what Joseph had in mind for Jesus .
Close to the execution site , Joseph had a new rock - cut tomb .
This vault had never been used , which indicates that Joseph had recently moved from Arimathea * to Jerusalem and that he expected to use this property as his family burial site .
Burying Jesus in Joseph’s own future tomb was a generous gesture on Joseph’s part and fulfilled the prophecy that the Messiah would be buried “ with the rich . ” ​ — Isa .
53 : 5 , 8 , 9 .
Is there anything to which you give more importance than your relationship with Jehovah ?

All four Gospels record that after Jesus ’ body was removed from the stake , Joseph wrapped it in fine linen and laid it in his own tomb .
The only person specifically stated to have helped Joseph was Nicodemus , who brought burial spices .
Given the status of these two , it is unlikely that they would have moved the body themselves .
It is more likely that they would have used servants to do the actual carrying and burying .
Be that as it may , the task that the two men undertook was not trivial .

Any who came in contact with a corpse incurred ceremonial uncleanness for seven days , making everything that they touched unclean .
Such a condition would require them to be secluded during the Passover week and to miss all its observances and celebrations .

By arranging Jesus ’ burial , Joseph also risked derision from his colleagues .
Yet , at this point , he was willing to accept the consequences of giving Jesus a dignified burial and of openly identifying himself as one of Christ’s disciples .
Beyond the Gospel accounts of Jesus ’ burial , the Bible mentions Joseph of Arimathea no more , leading to the obvious question : What became of him ?
The fact is , we do not know .
In the light of the foregoing , however , there is a strong likelihood that he openly declared himself to be a Christian .
After all , at the moment of test and crisis , his faith and boldness were increasing rather than diminishing .
That was a good sign . This story raises a question that all of us would do well to ponder : Is there anything at all ​ — be it position , career , possessions , family affections , or even our very freedom — ​ to which we give more importance than our relationship with Jehovah ?
Arimathea is likely identified with Ramah , modern - day Rentis ( Rantis ) .
This was the prophet Samuel’s hometown , located some 22 miles ( 35 km ) northwest of Jerusalem . ​ — 1 Sam .
1 : 19 , 20 .
“ Return to me , . . . and I will return to you . ” ​ — ZECH .
1 : 3 .
SONGS : 89 , 86
How does Jehovah view any kind of stealing ?
How can we live up to our dedication to God “ day after day ” ?
How can we do our part in keeping wickedness out of Jehovah’s house ?
1 - 3 . ( a ) What was the situation of Jehovah’s people when Zechariah began prophesying ?
( b ) Why did Jehovah ask his people to ‘ return to him ’ ?
A FLYING scroll , a woman sealed inside a container , and two women soaring in the wind with wings like those of storks ​ — such dramatic images are found in the book of Zechariah .
Why did Jehovah give these striking visions to his prophet ?
What was the situation of the Israelites at that time ?
How does Zechariah’s record of those visions affect us today ?
The year 537 B.C.E . was one of rejoicing for Jehovah’s dedicated people . After 70 long years of captivity , they were freed from Babylon .
With an initial burst of enthusiasm , they got to work on restoring true worship in Jerusalem .
In 536 B.C.E . , the foundation of the temple was laid .
At that time the people were “ shouting so loudly that the sound was heard from a great distance . ”
However , opposition soon mounted against their construction project .
Discouraged by the many challenges and difficulties , the people left off building the temple and began looking after their own homes and cultivating their fields .
Sixteen years later , the building of Jehovah’s temple was at a standstill .
God’s people needed to be reminded that they should return to Jehovah and stop putting their personal pursuits first .
Jehovah wanted them to return to him , to resume their fearless , wholehearted worship of him .
To help his people recall why they were freed from Babylon in the first place , God sent his prophet Zechariah in 520 B.C.E .
The very name Zechariah , which means “ Jehovah Has Remembered , ” may have brought to mind a vital truth .
Though they had forgotten Jehovah’s saving acts , God still remembered his people .
( Read Zechariah 1 : 3 , 4 . )
He lovingly assured them that he would help them to reestablish pure worship , but he also firmly warned them that he would not tolerate halfhearted worship .
Let us see how , by means of Zechariah’s sixth and seventh visions , Jehovah stirred them to action .

Also , what lessons can we today learn from this ?
What did Zechariah see in his sixth vision , and what is significant about the scroll’s having writing on both sides ?
( See opening image 1 . )
Chapter 5 of Zechariah begins with an unusual vision .
( Read Zechariah 5 : 1 , 2 . )

Zechariah sees flying through the air a scroll nearly 30 feet ( 9 m ) long and 15 feet ( 4.5 m ) wide !
It is unrolled , ready to be read .
It contains a judgment message , which fills both sides of the scroll .
Usually , only one side of a scroll was used , so this scroll clearly contains a weighty and serious message .
Stealing of any kind has no place among Christians ( See paragraphs 5 - 7 )
5 , 6 .
How does Jehovah view any kind of stealing ?
Read Zechariah 5 : 3 , 4 .
While all of mankind are accountable to Jehovah , his name people are even more so .
Those who love God realize that any form of stealing would “ dishonor the name of [ their ] God . ”
No matter what the motive or how excusable the theft might seem under the circumstances , a thief puts greedy desire above God , placing too much value on material possessions .
He minimizes God’s law , disregarding Jehovah and His name as being of no force or importance .
Did you notice at Zechariah 5 : 3 , 4 that “ the curse . . . [ would ] enter into the house of the thief . . . and it [ would ] remain inside that house and consume it ” ?

Jehovah’s adverse judgment cannot be kept out by bars and locks .
It can penetrate any hiding place to uncover wrongdoing among Jehovah’s people .
Even if a person is able to conceal thievery from authorities , employers , elders , or parents , he cannot hide it from God , who guarantees that every theft will be exposed .
How refreshing it is to associate with people who are ever conscious of being honest “ in all things ” ! ​ — Heb .
13 : 18 .
How can we escape the curse of the flying scroll ?
All forms of stealing are offensive to Jehovah .
We view it as an honor to live up to Jehovah’s high moral standard , maintaining conduct that in no way brings reproach on his name .
Thus , we may succeed in escaping Jehovah’s judgment against those who deliberately violate his law .
8 - 10 . ( a ) What is an oath ?
( b ) What oath did King Zedekiah fail to keep ?
The message written on the flying scroll next delivers a warning to those ‘ who make a false oath in God’s name . ’
An oath is a sworn statement to certify that something is true or a solemn promise that a person will or will not do a certain thing .
It is a very serious matter to swear an oath in the name of Jehovah . That is exactly what the last king to occupy the throne of Jerusalem did .
Zedekiah swore by Jehovah that he would remain a loyal vassal to the king of Babylon .
However , Zedekiah did not keep his sworn oath .
As a result , Jehovah passed judgment on him in these words : “ As surely as I am alive , . . .
[ Zedekiah ] will die in Babylon , in the place where the king who made him king lives , the one whose oath he despised and whose covenant he broke . ” ​ — Ezek .
17 : 16 .
King Zedekiah owed it to Jehovah to live up to the oath that he had sworn in God’s name .
Instead , Zedekiah turned to Egypt in a fruitless attempt to break free from Babylon’s yoke . ​ — Ezek .
17 : 11 - 15 , 17 , 18 .
11 , 12 . ( a ) What is the most important vow we will ever make ?
( b ) In what ways should our dedication vow affect our daily lives ?
Jehovah also listens to the promises that we make .
He takes our vows seriously , and we must fulfill them in order to have his approval .
Of all the promises we make , the most important is the one we make when we dedicate ourselves to Jehovah .
Dedication is a solemn vow to serve Jehovah unconditionally .
How can we prove true to our dedication vow ?
Our stand during tests both large and small should show that we take seriously our pledge to praise Jehovah “ day after day . ”
For example , when someone on the job or at school flirts with us , do we see this as an opportunity to “ take pleasure in [ Jehovah’s ] ways ” by rejecting such advances ?
If we live in a divided household , do we ask Jehovah for his help to maintain the Christian personality even when no one else around us is making such an effort ?
Do we daily approach our loving heavenly Father in prayer , thanking him for bringing us under his rulership and for loving us ?
Are we making time to read the Bible daily ?
Did we not , in effect , promise that we would do such things ? It is a matter of obedience .
Our full share in worship reveals that we love Jehovah and are truly dedicated to him .
Our worship is a way of life , not a mere formality .
Fulfilling our promise is for our own good ; our faithfulness leads to a secure future . ​ — Deut .
10 : 12 , 13 .
What can we learn from Zechariah’s sixth vision ?
Zechariah’s sixth vision has helped us to see that lovers of Jehovah should not engage in any kind of stealing or make false oaths .
We also see that despite their failures , Jehovah did not give up on the Israelites .
He understood the pressures they faced as they were surrounded by enemies .
He sets the example for us by living up to his promises , and he will help us live up to ours .

One way he offers help is by giving us the hope that he will soon put an end to all wickedness throughout the whole earth .
Zechariah’s next vision guarantees this bright hope .
14 , 15 . ( a ) In his seventh vision , what does Zechariah see ?
( See opening image 2 . ) ( b ) What does the woman inside the ephah container represent , and why is she confined and sealed away ?
After seeing the flying scroll , Zechariah is told by an angel to “ look up . ”
What will his seventh vision reveal ?
He now sees a container , called an “ ephah , ” going out .
( Read Zechariah 5 : 5 - 8 . )
This medium - sized container has a “ round lid of lead . ”
When the lid is removed , Zechariah sees “ a woman sitting inside . ”
The angel explains that the woman in the container is “ Wickedness . ”
Imagine Zechariah’s horror as he sees her attempt to crawl out of her confinement !
The angel takes swift action , throwing her back into the container and sealing it shut with the heavy lid .
What does this mean ?
This part of the vision highlights that Jehovah will not tolerate wickedness of any kind among his people .
He will see to it that it is contained and speedily removed .
The angel assures us of this by thrusting the lead lid back over the container .
Jehovah made every effort to keep pure worship clean ( See paragraphs 16 - 18 )
( a ) What did Zechariah next see happen to the ephah container ?
( See opening image 3 . ) ( b ) Where do the women with wings take the ephah container ?
Next on the scene appear two women who have strong wings like those of a stork .
( Read Zechariah 5 : 9 - 11 . )
How different these women are from the woman in the container !
These women use their powerful wings to swoop in and lift up the container containing “ Wickedness . ”
Where are they taking her ?
Wickedness is deposited in “ the land of Shinar , ” or Babylon .
Why , though , would they take the container to Babylon ?
17 , 18 . ( a ) Why is Shinar the “ proper place ” for “ Wickedness ” to reside ?
( b ) What should be our resolve regarding wickedness ?
To the Israelites of Zechariah’s day , Shinar would be a fitting place for Wickedness to be confined .
Zechariah and his fellow Jews could confirm that Babylon was a place of wickedness in their day .
Having grown up amid the filthy and idolatrous ways of this city , they had to fight every day to resist the spirit of that pagan world .
What a relief this vision must have brought them ​ — a guarantee that Jehovah would keep pure worship clean !
However , the vision also reminded the Jews of their responsibility to maintain the purity of their worship .
Wickedness cannot and will not be allowed to creep into and dwell among Jehovah’s people .
After we have been brought into the protective and loving care of God’s clean organization , we have the responsibility to help maintain it . Are we moved to keep our “ house ” clean ?
Wickedness in any form does not belong in our spiritual paradise .
What do the dramatic visions of Zechariah mean for us today ?
Zechariah’s sixth and seventh visions are a sober warning to those who persist in dishonest ways , a reminder that Jehovah does not tolerate wrongdoing . On the part of his sincere worshippers , there must be a genuine hatred of wickedness .
These accounts are also a loving reassurance from our heavenly Father .
If we diligently work to be the sort of people who have God’s approval and protection , we will not have to face a death - dealing curse .
Rather , Jehovah will gladly bless us . All our struggles to remain clean in a world full of wickedness will be worthwhile .
We can be sure that we can succeed with Jehovah’s help !
But how can we be sure that true worship will prevail in this world filled with ungodliness ?
What guarantee do we have that Jehovah will protect his organization as the great tribulation approaches ?
These questions will be discussed in the next article .
“ It will occur ​ — if you do not fail to listen to the voice of Jehovah your God . ” ​ — ZECH .
6 : 15 .
SONGS : 61 , 22
Of what does Zechariah’s final vision assure God’s people ?
How do the two copper mountains and the chariots provide encouragement for us ?
How do you feel about the greatest building work going on today ?
1 , 2 .
At the close of Zechariah’s seventh vision , what was the situation of the Jews in Jerusalem ?
AS Zechariah’s seventh vision closes , the prophet has much to think about .
Jehovah had guaranteed that he would hold dishonest people accountable for their wicked deeds .
This promise surely strengthened Zechariah .
Yet , nothing had really changed .
Dishonesty and other wicked practices were still present , and the rebuilding of Jehovah’s temple in Jerusalem was far from complete .
How could the Jews have abandoned their divinely appointed task so quickly ?
Had they returned to their homeland simply to further their own interests ?
Zechariah knew that the Jews who moved to Jerusalem were men and women of faith .
They were the ones “ whose spirit the true God had stirred ” to leave behind the security of their homes and businesses .
They left a land that was familiar to them in order to move to a place most of them had never seen .

If the rebuilding of Jehovah’s temple was not important , they would not have made the difficult journey of some 1,000 miles ( 1,600 km ) through a harsh land .

3 , 4 .
What obstacles did the returning Jews face ?
What would that journey have been like ?
As the Jews traveled along , they no doubt spent many hours thinking about their new home .
They had heard how beautiful the city of Jerusalem once was . The oldest ones among them had seen the former glory of the temple .
If you had traveled with them , how would you have felt when you first caught sight of Jerusalem , your new home ?
Would you have been saddened when you saw the ruined buildings overgrown with weeds ?
Would you have compared the massive double walls of Babylon with Jerusalem’s broken - down walls , with large gaps where gates and watchtowers once stood ?
Yet , the people took heart . They had already seen Jehovah’s saving hand in their behalf throughout their long trip homeward .
The first thing they did upon arriving was set up an altar on the site of the former temple , and they began to offer daily sacrifices to Jehovah .
In their initial excitement , it seemed that nothing could discourage them .
In addition to the temple work , the Israelites had to rebuild their cities . They had houses to restore , fields to plant , and mouths to feed .
The work before them seemed overwhelming .
Then the opposition came ​ — hard and fast .
Although they initially took a firm stand , 15 years of hostility took their toll .
A crushing blow was dealt in 522 B.C.E . when the Persian king banned further building in Jerusalem .
The future of that city seemed uncertain . ​ — Ezra 4 : 21 - 24 .
How did Jehovah respond to the inactivity of his people ?

Jehovah knew what his people needed .
God gave Zechariah a final vision to assure the Jews of His love and appreciation for all that they had done so far and to guarantee protection for them if they would return to His work .
In connection with rebuilding the temple , Jehovah promised : “ It will occur ​ — if you do not fail to listen to the voice of Jehovah your God . ” ​ — Zech .
6 : 15 .
( a ) How does Zechariah’s eighth vision begin ?
( See opening image . ) ( b ) Why are the horses of different colors ?
The last of Zechariah’s eight visions may perhaps be the most faith - strengthening .
( Read Zechariah 6 : 1 - 3 . )
Picture the scene : Charging forward “ from between two mountains . . . of copper ” come four chariots , likely fitted for battle .
The horses pulling the chariots are of different colors . This would help to distinguish one rider from the next .
“ What are these ? ”
asked Zechariah .
We too want to know , as this vision directly affects us .
Jehovah still uses his angels to protect and strengthen his people
7 , 8 . ( a ) What do the two mountains represent ?
( b ) Why are the mountains made of copper ?
In the Bible , mountains can represent kingdoms , or governments .
The mountains in Zechariah’s account are similar to two mountains described in Daniel’s prophecy .
One mountain represents Jehovah’s universal and eternal rulership . The other mountain represents the Messianic Kingdom in the hands of Jesus .
Since Jesus ’ enthronement in the autumn of 1914 , both mountains have been present and have played a special role in the fulfillment of God’s will on earth .
Why are the mountains made of copper ?
Like gold , copper is a metal that is highly valued .
Jehovah directed that this shiny metal be used in the construction of the tabernacle and later in the temple in Jerusalem .
Appropriately , then , the copper of the two symbolic mountains reminds us of the excellent quality of Jehovah’s universal sovereignty and of the Messianic Kingdom , which will provide stability and blessings to all mankind .
Who are the riders of the chariots , and what is their assignment ?
Now back to the chariots . What do they and their riders represent ?
The riders of the chariots are angels , likely groups or divisions of angels .
( Read Zechariah 6 : 5 - 8 . )
They are going out from “ before the Lord of the whole earth ” with a special mission to fulfill .
What assignment are they given ?
The chariots and their riders are sent out to care for specific territories . Their responsibility is to protect Jehovah’s people , particularly from “ the land of the north , ” Babylon .
Jehovah would make sure that Babylon would not enslave his people again .
What comfort this must have brought to the temple builders in Zechariah’s day !
They did not have to worry about interference from their enemies .
What assurance can God’s people today draw from Zechariah’s prophecy about the chariots and their riders ?
As in Zechariah’s day , Jehovah of armies still uses his angels to protect and strengthen his people .
Ever since spiritual Israel was released from symbolic captivity to Babylon the Great in 1919 , the expansion of true worship has been unstoppable despite relentless opposition .
Because we have angelic protection , we need not fear that Jehovah’s organization might go through another time of spiritual oppression .
Instead , we can be sure that God’s servants worldwide will continue to flourish spiritually .
As we reflect on Zechariah’s vision , we do not doubt that we are safe in the shadow of the two mountains .
Why do we not need to fear the coming attack on God’s people ?
Very soon the political powers of Satan’s world will form a coalition that is bent on the destruction of God’s people .
Ezekiel’s prophecy describes these forces as covering the land like the clouds and coming up against us in a fury , riding on horses .
* Do we have anything to fear ?
Not at all !
We have a cavalry on our side .
At that critical moment during the great tribulation , the angelic soldiers of Jehovah of armies will come together to protect God’s people and destroy those who oppose his sovereignty .
What a day that will be !
But who takes the lead among Jehovah’s heavenly army ?
12 , 13 . ( a ) What action is Zechariah now told to take ?
( b ) Explain how the man named Sprout is prophetic of Jesus Christ .
Zechariah has had eight visions that he alone observed .
Now he participates in a prophetic act as an encouragement to those who are restoring God’s temple .
( Read Zechariah 6 : 9 - 12 . )
Zechariah is told to collect silver and gold from Heldai , Tobijah , and Jedaiah ​ — three new arrivals returning from Babylon — ​ and to make “ a grand crown ” out of the contributions .
Is Zechariah told to place the crown on the head of Governor Zerubbabel of the tribe of Judah and a descendant of David ?
No .
Observers must have been intrigued when he placed the crown on High Priest Joshua .
Did the crowning of High Priest Joshua make him a king ?
No , Joshua was not from the royal line of David and thus did not qualify to be king .
His crowning was prophetic , pointing to a future and eternal king and priest .
The high priest who is made king is named Sprout .


The Scriptures clearly indicate that Sprout is Jesus Christ . ​ — Isa .
11 : 1 ; Matt . 2 : 23 , ftn .
What work does Jesus take on as King and High Priest ?
Acting as both King and High Priest , Jesus is the leader of Jehovah’s heavenly army .
As such , he works diligently so that God’s people as a whole may dwell in security despite living in the midst of this hostile world .
In the near future , Christ will take the lead in conquering the nations in support of God’s sovereignty and in defending Jehovah’s people .
Before executing judgment , however , Sprout has a great work to accomplish .
15 , 16 . ( a ) What restoration and refining work has been accomplished in modern times , and by whom ?
( b ) What will result by the end of Christ’s Thousand Year Reign ?
In addition to being commissioned King and High Priest , Jesus was assigned to “ build the temple of Jehovah . ”
( Read Zechariah 6 : 13 . )
In modern times , Jesus ’ building work involved liberating true worshippers from Babylon the Great and restoring the Christian congregation in 1919 .
He also appointed a “ faithful and discreet slave ” to take the lead in directing the work in the earthly courtyards of the great spiritual temple .
Jesus has also been busy refining God’s people and helping them to render worship that is clean . ​ — Mal .
3 : 1 - 3 .
During the Thousand Year Reign , Jesus and his 144,000 associate kings and priests will bring faithful humans to perfection .
When this is accomplished , only true worshippers of God will be left on the cleansed earth .
Finally , true worship will be fully restored !
What reassurance does Jehovah next give the Jews , and how does his message affect them ?
How , though , did Zechariah’s message affect the Jews in his day ?
Jehovah had guaranteed stability and protection for their work .
His assurance that the temple would be built must have brought hope to their tired hearts .
But how would just a few accomplish so much work ?
Zechariah’s next words remove any remaining fear or doubt .

In addition to the support of faithful ones like Heldai , Tobijah , and Jedaiah , God tells of many others who would “ come and take part in building the temple of Jehovah . ”
( Read Zechariah 6 : 15 . )

Confident of divine backing , the Jews quickly swing into action , resuming their building work despite the ban .
Soon Jehovah removes the mountainlike obstacle of the official ban , and the temple is completed in 515 B.C.E .
The words of Jehovah , however , describe things far greater for our day .
Jehovah will never forget the love that we show for him !
( See paragraphs 18 , 19 )
How is Zechariah 6 : 15 being fulfilled in our day ?
Today , millions join in true worship , and they are moved from the heart to contribute their “ valuable things , ” which include their time , energy , and resources in support of Jehovah’s great spiritual temple .
How can we be certain that Jehovah values our loyal support ?
Remember that Heldai , Tobijah , and Jedaiah brought the materials for the crown that Zechariah made .
The crown then served “ as a memorial , ” or “ reminder , ” of their contribution toward true worship .
Likewise , the work and the love we show for Jehovah will never be forgotten .
They will remain forever , cherished in Jehovah’s memory .
What effect should Zechariah’s visions have on us today ?
All that has been accomplished for true worship in these last days is tangible evidence of Jehovah’s blessing and Christ’s leadership .
We are part of a stable , secure , and everlasting organization .
Jehovah’s purpose regarding pure worship “ will occur . ”
Cherish your place among Jehovah’s people , and “ do not fail to listen to the voice of Jehovah your God . ”
Then you can remain under the protection of our King and High Priest and of the heavenly riders of the chariots .
Have as full a share as possible in supporting true worship .
As you do so , you can be certain that Jehovah of armies will keep you safe and secure during the remainder of this system of things ​ — and for eternity !
For more information , see “ Questions From Readers ” in The Watchtower , May 15 , 2015 , pp . 29 - 30 .
IN A small town in Gujarat , India , John’s father was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the late 1950 ’ s .
John as well as his five brothers and sisters and their mother were all staunch Roman Catholics and as such were opposed to the father’s faith .
One day , John’s father asked John to deliver an envelope to a friend in the congregation .
That morning , however , John cut his finger badly while opening a large tin barrel .

Nevertheless , wanting to obey his father , he tied a rag around his bleeding finger and set out on foot to deliver the envelope .
When John arrived at the address , the recipient’s wife , who was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , accepted the envelope .
She noticed John’s injured finger and offered to help .
She got out her first - aid kit , cleaned the wound with an antiseptic , and bandaged the finger .
Then she made John a cup of hot tea , all the while talking to him in a friendly manner about the Bible .

By this time , John’s prejudice toward the Witnesses was beginning to melt , so he asked her about two topics on which his father’s beliefs differed from his ​ — whether Jesus is God and whether Christians should pray to Mary .
Having learned John’s native Gujarati , the Witness answered him from the Bible and gave him the booklet “ This Good News of the Kingdom . ”
Later , as he read the booklet , John felt that he was hearing Bible truth for the first time .
He went to his priest and asked him the same two questions .
The priest soon lost his temper and threw a Bible at him , shouting : “ You’ve become Satan !
Show me where the Bible says that Jesus is not God .
Show me where it says that you should not worship Mary .
Show me ! ”
John was so shocked by the priest’s behavior that he told the priest , “ I will never set foot in a Catholic church again . ”
And he never did !
John started to study with the Witnesses , took his stand for true worship , and began serving Jehovah .
In time , several other members of the family did the same .
Today , John still has a scar on the forefinger of his right hand where he cut himself some 60 years ago .
He fondly remembers the one act of Christian kindness that drew him to a life of pure worship . ​ — 2 Cor .
6 : 4 , 6 .
OATHS had their proper place according to the Mosaic Law .
However , their use became so common in the everyday life of Jesus ’ contemporaries that there was the tendency to reinforce practically any utterance by swearing to it .
This frivolous practice was intended to add credence to one’s statements ; yet , Jesus twice denounced it .
Instead , he taught : “ Just let your word ‘ Yes ’ mean yes , your ‘ No , ’ no . ” ​ — Matt .
5 : 33 - 37 ; 23 : 16 - 22 .
According to the Theological Dictionary of the New Testament , that “ the inclination of the Jewish people to confirm all possible statements by an oath ” was very strong may be discerned from passages of the Talmud , which painstakingly specifies which oaths were to be considered binding and which were not .
Jesus was not alone in condemning these abuses .
For example , the Jewish historian Flavius Josephus said of a Jewish sect : “ Swearing they avoid , regarding it as worse than perjury , for they say that one who is not believed without an appeal to God stands condemned already . ”

The Jewish apocryphal writing known as the Wisdom of Sirach , or Ecclesiasticus , ( 23 : 11 ) likewise states : “ A man given to swearing is lawless to the core . ”
Jesus , then , condemned the practice of taking oaths lightly .
If we speak the truth at all times , we should not have to take an oath to make our words more believable .
3 Make a Joyful Sound !
For Jehovah’s people , singing has always been an integral part of worship .
However , some may feel uncomfortable singing in public .

How can we overcome the fear of using our voice to sing praises to Jehovah ?
This article gives us good reasons to sing out joyfully and offers some suggestions for improving our singing voice .
8 Are You Taking Refuge in Jehovah ?
13 Imitate Jehovah’s Justice and Mercy
We can learn valuable lessons from the arrangement of the cities of refuge in ancient Israel .
In the first article , look for ways that sinners can take refuge in Jehovah today .
In the second article , see how Jehovah’s example helps us to forgive others , respect life , and act justly .
18 “ The Generous Person Will Be Blessed ”
20 Reject Worldly Thinking
25 Let Nothing Deprive You of the Prize
These two articles are based on Paul’s inspired counsel to the Christians in Colossae .
The first article explains what to do when we hear worldly ideas that may sound appealing or convincing .
The second article reminds us of how to avoid attitudes that could deprive us of the blessings that Jehovah has promised .
30 How Can You Adjust to Your New Congregation ?
“ It is good to sing praises to our God . ” ​ — PS .
147 : 1 .
SONGS : 10 , 2
What role does singing play in true worship ?
How can you overcome obstacles and sing praises to Jehovah with feeling ?
What improvements have been made in the new songbook , and how can you make the best use of it ?
What does singing enable us to do ?
A POPULAR lyricist once said : “ Words make you think thoughts .
Music makes you feel a feeling .
But a song makes you feel a thought . ”
What better thoughts could we “ feel ” than those that express praise and love for our heavenly Father , Jehovah ?
It is no wonder that singing is a prominent aspect of pure worship , whether we are alone when we sing or we are with the congregation of God’s people .
2 , 3 . ( a ) How might some feel about singing aloud with the congregation ?
( b ) What questions will we consider ?
How , though , do you feel about singing aloud with the congregation ?
Do you find it embarrassing ?
In some cultures , men may feel uncomfortable singing in public .
This view can affect the whole congregation , especially if those taking the lead find reasons to hold back or to engage in other activities while the rest of the congregation is singing . ​ — Ps .
30 : 12 .
If we truly consider singing as part of our worship , we certainly will not want to walk out on or be absent from that part of the meeting program .
Thus , each one of us should ask himself : ‘ How do I view the singing at our meetings for worship ?
How can I overcome any apprehension that may hold me back from singing out joyfully ?
And what can I do to express fully the feeling of the songs we sing ? ’
4 , 5 .
How extensive were the arrangements for singing in worship in ancient Israel ?
Faithful worshippers of Jehovah have long used music as a way to praise Jehovah .
It is noteworthy that when the ancient Israelites were faithfully serving Jehovah , singing was prominent in their worship .
For example , in preparation for service at the temple , King David organized 4,000 Levites to provide music of praise .
Among these , 288 were “ trained in song to Jehovah , all experts . ” ​ — 1 Chron .
23 : 5 ; 25 : 7 .

At the inauguration of the temple , music and singing played a prominent role .
The account tells us : “ At the moment when the trumpeters and the singers were praising and thanking Jehovah in unison , and as the sound ascended from the trumpets , the cymbals , and the other musical instruments as they were praising Jehovah , . . . the glory of Jehovah filled the house of the true God . ”
What a faith - strengthening occasion that must have been ! ​ — 2 Chron .
5 : 13 , 14 ; 7 : 6 .
Describe the special presentation of singing during Nehemiah’s rule as governor in Jerusalem .
When Nehemiah led the faithful Israelites in rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem , he also organized the Levite singers with full instrumental accompaniment .
When the rebuilt walls were dedicated , the special music presentation contributed greatly to the joy of the occasion .
This time , there were “ two large thanksgiving choirs . ”
Walking in opposite directions , the choirs met on the wall close to the temple area to create a sound that could be heard from far away .
Jehovah was no doubt pleased to hear his worshippers enthusiastically praising him in song .
How did Jesus emphasize the need for singing in Christian worship ?
With the establishment of the Christian congregation , music continued to be a prominent feature of true worship .
On the most important night in human history , Jesus included the singing of songs after the institution of the Lord’s Evening Meal . ​ — Read Matthew 26 : 30 .
How did the first - century Christians set a pattern of singing in worship ?
First - century Christians set a pattern of praising God together in song .
Even though they often met in private homes , the modest surroundings for worship did not diminish their zeal for singing to Jehovah .
Under inspiration , the apostle Paul directed his Christian brothers : “ Keep on teaching and encouraging one another with psalms , praises to God , spiritual songs sung with gratitude , singing in your hearts to Jehovah . ”
The songs in our songbook are truly “ spiritual songs [ to be ] sung with gratitude . ”
They are a part of the spiritual food provided by “ the faithful and discreet slave . ” ​ — Matt .
24 : 45 .
( a ) What might prevent some from singing out joyfully at our meetings and assemblies ?
( b ) How should we sing praises to Jehovah , and who should take the lead ?
( See opening picture . )
What if singing is not customary in your family , culture , or environment ?
With the availability of modern technology , you may enjoy listening to professional singers .
Yet , you may feel embarrassed or disappointed when comparing your voice with productions from the entertainment world .
That , however , should not interfere with your responsibility to sing praises to Jehovah .
Rather , hold your songbook up high , lift your head , and sing with heartfelt expression !
What should we remember if fear inhibits us from singing out ?


One factor that keeps many from singing with a full voice is fear .

It may be fear of standing out or of possibly sounding unpleasant to others .

However , we should keep in mind that when we speak , “ we all stumble many times . ”
Yet , that does not stop us from speaking .
So why should we let our imperfect singing voices stop us from praising Jehovah in song ?
11 , 12 .
What are some suggestions for improving our singing ?
Perhaps we are apprehensive about singing because we are unsure of how to sing .
Yet , we can improve our singing by applying some basic suggestions .
*
You can learn to sing with power and volume by breathing properly .
Much as electricity powers a light bulb , breathing energizes your voice when you speak or sing .
You should sing as loud as you speak or even louder than that .
( See the suggestions found in Benefit From Theocratic Ministry School Education , pages 181 to 184 , under the subheading “ Properly Control Your Air Supply . ” )
In fact , within the context of singing praises , the Scriptures sometimes direct Jehovah’s worshippers to “ shout joyfully . ” ​ — Ps .
33 : 1 - 3 .
Explain how we can increase our confidence in our singing .
During family worship or even on your own , try the following : Choose one of your favorite songs from our songbook .
Read the lyrics out loud in a strong , confident voice .
Next , using the same volume , say all the words from a single phrase of the song in one breath .
Then sing the phrase , using the same vibrant voice .
Your singing voice will become fuller , and that is a good thing .
Do not let it scare you or embarrass you !
( a ) How can opening our mouth wider help our singing ?
( See the box “ How to Improve Your Singing . ” ) ( b ) What suggestions for overcoming voice problems do you find practical ?
You will not produce a full singing voice unless you make space in your mouth .
So another suggestion is to open your mouth wider than you do for normal speaking .
What should you do if you feel that you have a weak voice or perhaps a voice that is too high - pitched ?
You can find practical suggestions regarding these problems in Benefit From Theocratic Ministry School Education , page 184 , in the box “ Overcoming Specific Problems . ”
( See paragraphs 11 - 14 )
Use good posture
Take a deep breath
Open your mouth and throat wide
Sing out
( a ) What announcement was made at the 2016 annual meeting ?
( b ) What are some of the objectives of the new songbook ?
There was excitement at the 2016 annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania when Brother Stephen Lett of the Governing Body announced that a new songbook , entitled “ Sing Out Joyfully ” to Jehovah , would soon be available for use at the meetings .
Brother Lett explained that one objective of the revision was to bring the songs into harmony with the revised New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
This required removing or revising lyrics that used expressions no longer found in the New World Translation as a result of the 2013 revision .
Further , new songs about our preaching work and songs that express our appreciation for the ransom have been included .
Also , because singing is an integral part of our worship , the Governing Body wanted to produce a high - quality book that matches the cover of the revised New World Translation .
16 , 17 .
What refinements were made in the new songbook ?
To make “ Sing Out Joyfully ” to Jehovah easier to use , the songs are arranged by subject matter .
For example , the first 12 songs relate to Jehovah , the next 8 songs are about Jesus and the ransom , and so on .
There is a subject index that will be helpful , for instance , when choosing a song for a public talk .

To help everyone to sing from the heart , some lyrics have been revised to improve clarity of thought and to remove words that are no longer in common use .
For example , the word “ shall ” is not widely used today , so it has been replaced .
Similarly , the title “ Long - Suffering ” has been changed to “ Exercise Patience , ” and the lyrics have been adjusted accordingly .
The change of the title “ Guard Your Heart ” to “ We Guard Our Hearts ” was most considerate .
Why ? In the audience at our meetings , assemblies , and conventions are many new ones , interested ones , young ones , and sisters who by singing the words would be put in the awkward position of telling others what to do .
So the title and the lyrics were modified .

Practice the songs during family worship ( See paragraph 18 )
Why should we become familiar with the songs in our new songbook ?
( See footnote . )
Many of the songs from “ Sing Out Joyfully ” to Jehovah are in the form of a prayer .
With these songs , you can express your personal feelings to Jehovah .
Other songs will help “ to incite [ us ] to love and fine works . ”
Surely we want to become familiar with the melodies , rhythms , and lyrics of our songs . You can do so by listening to the vocal renditions available on jw.org .
By practicing the songs at home , you can learn to sing them with confidence and heartfelt expression .
*
How can all in the congregation directly share in worshipping Jehovah ?
Remember that singing is an important feature of our worship .
It is a powerful way to show our love and appreciation for Jehovah .
( Read Isaiah 12 : 5 . )
When you sing out joyfully , you will also encourage others to sing with confidence .
Indeed , all in the congregation ​ — young , old , and newly interested ones — ​ can join in this form of direct worship of Jehovah .
So do not hold back in expressing yourself in song .
Instead , obey the clear direction from the inspired psalmist : “ Sing to Jehovah ! ”
Yes , make a joyful sound ! ​ — Ps .
96 : 1 .
For more instruction on improving the singing voice , see the December 2014 monthly program on JW Broadcasting ( video category FROM OUR STUDIO ) .
To help us get into the spirit of singing , each of the convention and assembly program sessions opens with a ten - minute music presentation .
These orchestral arrangements are composed in such a way that they will prepare our heart and mind for the program to follow .
Therefore , we are encouraged to be in our seats from the start and to listen attentively to these music programs .
“ Jehovah is redeeming the life of his servants ; none of those taking refuge in him will be found guilty . ” ​ — PS .
34 : 22 .
SONGS : 8 , 54
the role of the elders in helping a person recover from a serious sin ?
the need to take decisive action to benefit from God’s mercy ?
the completeness of Jehovah’s forgiveness ?
Because of sin , what feelings are common among God’s faithful servants ?
“ MISERABLE man that I am ! ”
Many of God’s faithful servants have echoed those words of the apostle Paul .
We all suffer from inherited sin , and when our actions do not reflect our keen desire to please Jehovah , we may feel miserable .
Some Christians who have committed a serious sin have even felt that they are beyond God’s forgiveness .
( a ) How does Psalm 34 : 22 indicate that God’s servants need not be overwhelmed by guilt ?
( b ) What will this article consider ?
( See the box “ Lessons or Antitypes ? ” )
Nevertheless , the Scriptures assure us that those who take refuge in Jehovah do not need to feel overwhelmed by guilt .
( Read Psalm 34 : 22 . )
What does taking refuge in Jehovah involve ?
What steps must we take in order to receive Jehovah’s mercy and forgiveness ?

We learn the answers to those questions by considering the arrangement of cities of refuge in ancient Israel .
True , that arrangement was instituted under the Law covenant , which was replaced at Pentecost 33 C.E .
Remember , though , that the Law came from Jehovah .
So from the arrangement of the cities of refuge , we learn Jehovah’s view of sin , sinners , and repentance .
First , let us get an overview of the purpose and function of these cities .
How did the Israelites handle cases of willful murder ?

Jehovah took seriously all cases of bloodshed in ancient Israel .
Willful murderers were put to death by the victim’s nearest male relative , known as “ the avenger of blood . ”
This act atoned for the innocent human blood that had been spilled .
Swift execution protected the Promised Land from becoming defiled , for Jehovah commanded : “ You must not pollute the land in which you live , for [ the shedding of human ] blood pollutes the land . ” ​ — Num .
35 : 33 , 34 .
How were cases of accidental bloodshed handled in Israel ?
How , though , did the Israelites handle cases of accidental bloodshed ?
Although his deed was accidental , an unintentional manslayer was still guilty of shedding innocent blood .
Mercifully , however , he was allowed to flee from the avenger of blood to one of the six cities of refuge . There , he could find protection .
The unintentional manslayer had to remain in the city of refuge until the high priest’s death . ​ — Num .
35 : 15 , 28 .
How can the arrangement of the cities of refuge help us to understand Jehovah better ?
Designating these cities as cities of refuge was not a human idea . Jehovah himself commanded Joshua : “ Tell the Israelites , ‘ Select for yourselves the cities of refuge . ’ ”
The cities were given “ a sacred status . ”
Since Jehovah was directly involved in setting these cities apart for special use , we might ask : How does this arrangement help us to have a clearer view of Jehovah’s mercy ?
And what does it teach us about how we can take refuge in him today ?
6 , 7 . ( a ) Describe the role of the elders in judging an unintentional manslayer .
( See opening picture . ) ( b ) Why was it wise for a fugitive to approach the elders ?
After he accidentally killed someone , a fugitive first had to “ present his case in the hearing of the elders ” at the gate of the city of refuge to which he had fled .
He was to be received hospitably .
Some time later , he was sent back to the elders of the city where the killing had occurred , and those elders judged the case .
( Read Numbers 35 : 24 , 25 . )

Only after they had declared the killing accidental would the fugitive be returned to the city of refuge .
Why were the elders involved ?
They were to keep the congregation of Israel clean and to help the unintentional manslayer to benefit from Jehovah’s mercy .
One Bible scholar wrote that if the fugitive neglected to approach the elders , “ it was at his peril . ”
He added : “ His blood was on his own head , because he did not make use of the security God had provided for him . ”
Help was available to the unintentional manslayer , but he had to seek out and accept that help .
If he did not seek refuge in one of the cities Jehovah had set aside , the closest relative of the person he had killed was free to put him to death .
8 , 9 .
Why should a Christian guilty of serious sin approach the elders for help ?
Today , a Christian guilty of serious sin needs to seek the help of congregation elders to recover .
Why is this so important ?
First , the arrangement for elders to handle cases of serious sin comes from Jehovah , as outlined in his Word .
Second , this arrangement fortifies repentant wrongdoers to remain in God’s care and to avoid a pattern of sin .
Third , elders are commissioned and trained to reassure repentant sinners , helping to ease their pain and guilt .
Jehovah calls these older men “ a refuge from the rainstorm . ”
Would you not agree that this arrangement is an expression of God’s mercy ?
Many of God’s servants have discovered the relief that comes from seeking and receiving help from the elders .
A brother named Daniel , for example , committed a serious sin , but for several months he hesitated to approach the elders .
“ After so much time had gone by , ” he admits , “ I thought that there wasn’t anything the elders could do for me anymore .

Still , I was always looking over my shoulder , waiting for the consequences of my actions .
And when I prayed to Jehovah , I felt that I had to preface everything with an apology for what I had done . ”
Finally , Daniel sought the help of the elders .
Looking back , he says : “ Sure , I was scared to approach them .
But afterward , it seemed as if someone had lifted a huge weight off my shoulders .
Now , I feel that I can approach Jehovah without anything being in the way . ”
Today , Daniel has a clean conscience , and he was recently appointed as a ministerial servant .
To receive mercy , what decisive action did an unintentional manslayer have to take ?
An unintentional manslayer had to take action to receive mercy .
He had to flee to the nearest city of refuge .
( Read Joshua 20 : 4 . )

We cannot imagine the fugitive being indifferent ; his life depended on his reaching that city as soon as possible and remaining there !
This meant sacrifice on his part .

He had to leave behind his previous employment , the comforts of home , and the freedom to travel ​ — until the death of the high priest .
* But such inconveniences were worth the effort .
If he were to leave the city , the fugitive would show a callous indifference toward the lifeblood he had shed , and his own life would be in danger .
What actions of a repentant Christian show that he has not taken God’s mercy for granted ?

To benefit from God’s mercy , repentant wrongdoers today must likewise take action .
We must completely abandon the sinful course , fleeing not only from serious sin but also from the lesser sins that often lead to gross wrongdoing .
Under inspiration , the apostle Paul described the actions of repentant Christians in Corinth .
He wrote : “ What a great earnestness your being saddened in a godly way produced in you , yes , clearing of yourselves , yes , indignation , yes , fear , yes , earnest desire , yes , zeal , yes , righting of the wrong ! ”
Earnest actions to abandon a sinful course show Jehovah that we are not complacent , that we have not presumed on his mercy .

A Christian may need to give up what in order to continue to receive divine mercy ?
What might a Christian need to give up in order to continue to receive divine mercy ?
He must be prepared to give up even what is dear to him if it would put him in danger of falling into sin .
If certain friends influence you to do things that displease Jehovah , will you cut off association with them ?
If you struggle to be moderate in your use of alcoholic beverages , are you willing to steer clear of situations that might tempt you to overdrink ?
If you battle sexually immoral desires , are you avoiding any movies , websites , or activities that may trigger unclean thoughts ?
Remember , any sacrifice we make to keep our integrity to Jehovah is worth it .
Nothing stings more than feeling abandoned by him .
At the same time , nothing is more satisfying than feeling his “ everlasting loyal love . ” ​ — Isa .
54 : 7 , 8 .
Explain why a fugitive could feel safe , secure , and happy within the city of refuge .
Once inside a city of refuge , the fugitive was safe .
Regarding those cities , Jehovah said : “ They will serve as a refuge for you . ”
Jehovah did not require the manslayer to be judged again for the same case ; nor was the avenger of blood permitted to enter the city and take the fugitive’s life .
The fugitive thus never had to fear reprisal .
While in the city , he was safe and secure under Jehovah’s protection . This was not a prison of refuge .
The city offered him an opportunity to work , to help others , and to serve Jehovah in peace .
Yes , a happy and fulfilling life was possible !
Be confident in Jehovah’s forgiveness ( See paragraphs 14 - 16 )
What confidence can a repentant Christian have ?
Some of God’s people who sinned grievously but who repented have felt “ imprisoned ” by their guilt , even feeling that Jehovah will forever view them as tainted by gross wrongdoing .
If you feel that way , please be assured that when Jehovah forgives you , you can feel secure in his mercy !
Daniel , quoted earlier , found this to be true .
After the elders had corrected him and helped him to regain a clear conscience , he said : “ I felt that I could breathe again .
After the matter was handled properly , I didn’t have to feel guilty anymore .
Once the sin is gone , it’s gone .
As Jehovah said , he takes your burdens away and puts them far away from you .
You will never have to see them again . ”
Once inside the city of refuge , a fugitive no longer needed to look over his shoulder for the avenger of blood .
Similarly , once Jehovah has forgiven our sin , we do not need to fear that he is looking for a reason to bring up that sin again or to judge us for it . ​ — Read Psalm 103 : 8 - 12 .
15 , 16 .

How can Jesus ’ role as Ransomer and High Priest strengthen your confidence in God’s mercy ?
In fact , we have even greater reason than the Israelites had for confidence in Jehovah’s mercy .
After Paul expressed his misery for failing to obey Jehovah perfectly , he exclaimed : “ Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord ! ”
Yes , despite his struggle with sin and his past wrongdoing ​ — for which he had repented — ​ Paul was confident in God’s forgiveness through Jesus .
As our Ransomer , Jesus cleanses our consciences and gives us inner peace .

As our High Priest , “ he is able also to save completely those who are approaching God through him , because he is always alive to plead for them . ”
If the role of the high priest reassured the Israelites that their sins would be forgiven , how much more so should the services of our High Priest , Jesus , reassure us that “ we may receive mercy and find undeserved kindness to help us at the right time . ” ​ — Heb .
4 : 15 , 16 .
To take refuge in Jehovah , then , exercise faith in Jesus ’ sacrifice .
Do not simply acknowledge the ransom’s value in helping vast numbers of people .
Rather , have faith that the ransom applies to you .
Have faith that the ransom is the basis for forgiving your sins . Have faith that the ransom offers you the hope of eternal life .
Jesus ’ sacrifice is Jehovah’s gift to you .
Why do you want to take refuge in Jehovah ?
The cities of refuge are a reflection of Jehovah’s mercy .
Through this arrangement , God not only emphasized the sacredness of life but also illustrated how the elders assist us , what true repentance involves , and why we can be completely confident of Jehovah’s forgiveness .
Are you taking refuge in Jehovah ?
There is no safer place to be ! In the next article , we will see how the cities of refuge can help us to imitate Jehovah’s superlative example of justice and mercy .
According to Jewish reference works , the unintentional manslayer’s immediate family evidently joined him in the city of refuge .
Beginning in the late 19th century , The Watch Tower drew attention to the prophetic significance of the cities of refuge .
“ This feature of the typical Mosaic law strongly foreshadowed the refuge which the sinner may find in Christ , ” stated the September 1 , 1895 , issue .
“ Seeking refuge in him by faith , there is protection . ”
A century later , The Watchtower identified the antitypical city of refuge as “ God’s provision for protecting us from death for violating his commandment about the sanctity of blood . ”
However , the March 15 , 2015 , issue of The Watchtower explained why our recent publications seldom mention prophetic types and antitypes : “ Where the Scriptures teach that an individual , an event , or an object is typical of something else , we accept it as such .
Otherwise , we ought to be reluctant to assign an antitypical application to a certain person or account if there is no specific Scriptural basis for doing so . ”
Because the Scriptures are silent regarding any antitypical significance of the cities of refuge , this article and the next one emphasize instead the lessons Christians can learn from this arrangement .
“ Judge with true justice , and deal with one another in loyal love and mercy . ” ​ — ZECH .
7 : 9 .
SONGS : 125 , 88
How may we imitate Jehovah’s mercy when others need our forgiveness ?
How do we show that we share Jehovah’s view of life ?
How should elders reflect divine justice when judging cases of wrongdoing ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) How did Jesus feel about God’s Law ?
( b ) How did the scribes and Pharisees misrepresent the Law ?
JESUS loved the Mosaic Law .
And no wonder ! That Law came from the most important Person in Jesus ’ life ​ — his Father , Jehovah .
Jesus ’ deep affection for the law of God was prophetically expressed at Psalm 40 : 8 : “ To do your will , O my God , is my delight , and your law is deep within me . ”
By word and deed , Jesus affirmed that God’s Law was perfect , beneficial , and sure to be fulfilled . ​ — Matt .

5 : 17 - 19 .
How pained Jesus must have been , then , when he saw the scribes and Pharisees misrepresent his Father’s Law !
They meticulously obeyed some of its smallest details , for Jesus acknowledged : “ You give the tenth of the mint and the dill and the cumin . ”
So , what was the problem ?
He added : “ But you have disregarded the weightier matters of the Law , namely , justice and mercy and faithfulness . ” Unlike those self - righteous Pharisees , Jesus grasped the spirit behind the Law , the divine qualities reflected in each commandment .
What will this article consider ?
As Christians , we are not under the Law covenant .
Yet , Jehovah preserved that Law for us in his Word , the Bible .
He wants us , not to obsess over the details of the Law , but to discern and apply its “ weightier matters , ” the lofty principles that underpin its commandments .
For example , what principles might we discern in the arrangement of cities of refuge ?
The preceding article outlined lessons learned from the steps taken by the fugitive .
But from the cities of refuge , we also learn about Jehovah and how we may reflect his qualities .
Therefore , this article will answer three questions : How do the cities of refuge reveal Jehovah’s mercy ?
What do they teach us about his view of life ?
How do they reflect his perfect justice ?
In each case , look for ways that you can imitate your heavenly Father . ​ — Read Ephesians 5 : 1 .
4 , 5 . ( a ) How and why were the cities of refuge made easily accessible ?
( b ) What does this teach us about Jehovah ?
The six cities of refuge were easy to access .
Jehovah commanded Israel to distribute the cities evenly on both sides of the Jordan River .
Why ?
So that any fugitive could find refuge quickly and conveniently .
Roads leading to the cities of refuge were kept in good repair .
According to Jewish tradition , guideposts were erected to direct fugitives to the cities .
Since the cities of refuge were available , an unintentional manslayer was not forced to flee to a foreign land , where he might be tempted to take up false worship .
Think of it : Jehovah ​ — the very One who had mandated capital punishment for willful murderers — ​ gave unintentional manslayers ample opportunity to receive compassion and protection !
“ Every thing was made as plain , as simple , and as easy as possible , ” wrote one commentator .
“ Such was God’s gracious way . ”
Jehovah is not a heartless judge who is eager to punish his servants .
Rather , he is “ rich in mercy . ” ​ — Eph .
2 : 4 .

How was the Pharisees ’ attitude in contrast with God’s mercy ?
The Pharisees , in contrast , were reluctant to extend mercy .
For example , according to tradition , they were unwilling to forgive the same offense more than three times .
Jesus highlighted their attitude toward offenders by relating an illustration of a Pharisee who prayed : “ O God , I thank you that I am not like everyone else ​ — extortioners , unrighteous , adulterers — ​ or even like this tax collector ” ​ — a tax collector who was humbly praying for God’s mercy .
Why were the Pharisees so unwilling to show mercy ?
The Bible says that they “ considered others as nothing . ” ​ — Luke 18 : 9 - 14 .
Is the “ road ” to your forgiveness open and in good repair ?
Be approachable ( See paragraphs 4 - 8 )
7 , 8 . ( a ) When someone sins against you , how can you imitate Jehovah ?
( b ) Why is forgiveness a test of humility ?
Imitate Jehovah , not the Pharisees .
Show compassion .
( Read Colossians 3 : 13 . )
One way to do so is to make it easy for others to seek your forgiveness .
Ask yourself : ‘ Is my forgiveness within reach of people who have wronged me , even repeatedly ?
Am I eager to restore peace with someone who has offended me or who has hurt me ? ’
Forgiveness is really a test of humility .
The Pharisees failed that test because they considered others to be inferior .
As Christians , however , we must humbly “ consider others superior ” to us , as worthy of our forgiveness .
Will you imitate Jehovah and pass the test of humility ?
Keep the “ road ” to your forgiveness open and in good repair .
Be quick to extend mercy and slow to take offense . ​ — Eccl .
7 : 8 , 9 .
How did Jehovah impress on the Israelites the sanctity of human life ?
A key purpose of the cities of refuge was to protect the Israelites from bloodguilt .
Jehovah loves life , and he hates murderous “ hands that shed innocent blood . ”
A just and holy God , he could not ignore even accidental bloodshed .
True , an unintentional manslayer was shown mercy .
Even so , he had to present his case before the elders , and if his deed was judged accidental , he had to remain in the city of refuge until the death of the high priest .
This might mean spending the rest of his life there .
These serious consequences impressed on all Israelites the sanctity of human life .
To honor their Life - Giver , they needed to avoid any action or inaction that could endanger the life of their fellow man .

According to Jesus , how did the scribes and Pharisees show a careless disregard for life ?
Unlike Jehovah , the scribes and Pharisees showed a careless disregard for life .
How so ?
“ You took away the key of knowledge , ” Jesus told them .
“ You yourselves did not go in , and you hinder those going in ! ”
They were supposed to unlock the meaning of God’s Word and help others to walk on the road to eternal life .
Instead , they directed people away from “ the Chief Agent of life , ” Jesus , leading them toward a course that could end in eternal destruction .
Proud and selfish , the scribes and Pharisees cared little for the life and welfare of their fellow humans .
How cruel and unmerciful !
( a ) How did the apostle Paul show that he shared God’s view of life ?
( b ) What will help us to share Paul’s attitude toward the ministry ?

How can we avoid the attitude of the scribes and Pharisees and imitate Jehovah ?
We should respect and treasure the gift of life .
The apostle Paul did that by giving a thorough witness .
As a result , he could say : “ I am clean from the blood of all men . ”
( Read Acts 20 : 26 , 27 . )

Still , neither guilt nor duty moved Paul to preach .
Rather , he loved people , and their lives were precious to him .
We should likewise strive to cultivate a godly view of life .
Jehovah “ desires all to attain to repentance . ”
Do you ?
You may find that kindling a merciful attitude in your heart will motivate you to increase your zeal in the ministry and fill you with more joy as you do so .
Why is safety important to God’s people ?
We also share Jehovah’s view of life by cultivating a proper attitude toward safety .


We must drive and work safely , even when we are building , maintaining , or traveling to places of worship .
Never put production , finances , or schedules ahead of safety and health .
Our just God always does what is right and proper .
We want to be like him .
Elders in particular strive to be conscious of both their own safety and the safety of those working around them .
If an elder reminds you of safety rules and standards , therefore , accept his counsel .
View life as Jehovah views it , and “ no bloodguilt will come upon you . ”
13 , 14 .
How could Israelite elders reflect Jehovah’s justice ?
Jehovah commissioned Israelite elders to imitate his high standard of justice .
First , the elders needed to establish the facts .
Further , they had to weigh carefully a manslayer’s motive , attitude , and previous conduct when deciding whether to show mercy .

To reflect divine justice , they had to determine whether the fugitive acted “ out of hatred ” and “ with malicious intent . ”
( Read Numbers 35 : 20 - 24 . )
If the testimony of witnesses was considered , at least two witnesses had to substantiate a charge of intentional murder . ​ — Num .
35 : 30 .
Thus , after establishing the facts of the case , the elders had to look at the person , not just the action .
They needed insight , the ability to look beyond the obvious and to see into a matter .
Above all , they needed Jehovah’s holy spirit , which would enable them to reflect his insight , mercy , and justice . ​ — Ex .
34 : 6 , 7 .
Contrast the way Jesus and the Pharisees viewed sinners .
The Pharisees focused solely on what a sinner had done rather than on who a sinner was at heart .
When Pharisees saw Jesus attending a banquet at Matthew’s home , they asked his disciples : “ Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners ? ”
Jesus replied : “ Healthy people do not need a physician , but those who are ill do .

Go , then , and learn what this means : ‘ I want mercy , and not sacrifice . ’
For I came to call , not righteous people , but sinners . ”
Was Jesus excusing serious wrongdoing ?
Not at all .
In fact , Jesus ’ principal message included the call to repent from sin .
Nevertheless , Jesus insightfully noted that at least some of these “ tax collectors and sinners ” wanted to change .
They were not at Matthew’s home simply to eat .
Rather , “ there were many of them who were following [ Jesus ] . ”
Sadly , most Pharisees failed to see in such ones what Jesus saw .
Unlike the just and merciful God they claimed to worship , the Pharisees labeled their fellow men sinners , condemning them as hopeless .
What does a judicial committee endeavor to discern ?
Elders today must be sure to imitate Jehovah , who “ loves justice . ”
First , they need to make “ a thorough investigation and inquiry ” to establish if wrong has been done .
If it has , they will then handle the case according to Scriptural guidelines .
When they serve on judicial committees , they must carefully determine whether a Christian guilty of serious sin is repentant .
Repentance ​ — or the lack of it — ​ is not always obvious .
It involves a person’s viewpoint , disposition , and heart condition .
A sinner must be repentant if he is to receive mercy .
*
17 , 18 .
How can elders discern heartfelt repentance ?
( See opening picture . )
Unlike Jehovah and Jesus , elders cannot read hearts .
If you are an elder , then , how can you meet the challenge of discerning heartfelt repentance ?
First , pray for wisdom and discernment .
Second , consult God’s Word and publications from the faithful slave to help you distinguish “ sadness of the world ” from “ sadness in a godly way , ” genuine repentance .
See how the Scriptures portray both repentant and unrepentant ones .
How does the Bible describe their feelings , their attitude , and their conduct ?
Finally , endeavor to see the whole person . Take into consideration a wrongdoer’s background , his motives , and his limitations .
Regarding the head of the Christian congregation , Jesus , the Bible prophesied : “ He will not judge by what appears to his eyes , nor reprove simply according to what his ears hear .
He will judge the lowly with fairness , and with uprightness he will give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth . ”
You elders are Jesus ’ undershepherds , and he will help you to judge as he judges .
Are we not grateful that we have caring elders who endeavor to do that ?
How we appreciate their tireless efforts to promote mercy and justice in our congregations !

What lesson from the cities of refuge do you plan to apply ?
The Mosaic Law reflected a “ framework of the knowledge and of the truth ” about Jehovah and his righteous principles .
The cities of refuge , for example , teach elders how to “ judge with true justice , ” and they teach all of us how to “ deal with one another in loyal love and mercy . ”
We are no longer under the Law .
Yet , Jehovah does not change , and the qualities of justice and mercy are still important to him .
What a privilege to worship a God in whose image we are made , whose qualities we can imitate , and in whom we can take refuge !
See “ Questions From Readers ” in The Watchtower , September 15 , 2006 , p . 30 .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
Two Christian sisters share the Bible’s message with a merchant in the town of Tipitapa
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
SACRIFICES have long been an important part of true worship .
The Israelites offered animal sacrifices , and Christians have always been well - known for their “ sacrifice of praise . ”
Yet , there are other sacrifices with which God is well - pleased .
These sacrifices bring both joy and blessings , as the following examples show .
Hannah , a faithful servant of old , dearly wanted a son but had been unable to bear children .
In prayer , she vowed to Jehovah that if she would bear a son , she would “ give him to Jehovah all the days of his life . ”
In time , Hannah did become pregnant , and she gave birth to a son named Samuel .

After Samuel was weaned , Hannah took him to the tabernacle , just as she had vowed .
Jehovah blessed Hannah for her self - sacrificing spirit .
She was privileged to have five more children , and Samuel became a prophet and a Bible writer . ​ — 1 Sam .
2 : 21 .

Like Hannah and Samuel , Christians today have the privilege of using their lives in dedicated service to their Creator .
Jesus promised that any sacrifices we make to worship Jehovah will be richly rewarded . ​ — Mark 10 : 28 - 30 .
In the first century , a Christian woman named Dorcas was well - known for her “ good deeds and gifts of mercy ” ​ — sacrifices she made to help others .
Sadly , however , “ she fell sick and died , ” bringing grief to the congregation .

When the disciples heard that Peter was in the area , they urged him to come at once .
Imagine their joy when Peter came and raised Dorcas from the dead ​ — the first recorded resurrection by an apostle !
God had not forgotten the sacrifices of Dorcas .

Her record of generosity has been preserved in God’s Word as a fine example for us to imitate .
The apostle Paul likewise set an excellent example of one who gave generously of his time and attention .
Writing to his Christian brothers in Corinth , Paul said : “ For my part , I will most gladly spend and be completely spent for you . ”
Paul learned through experience that sacrificing oneself in behalf of others brings not only personal satisfaction but also ​ — and more important — ​ Jehovah’s blessing and approval . ​ — Acts 20 : 24 , 35 .
Clearly , Jehovah is pleased when we use our time and energy to promote Kingdom interests and assist fellow believers .
But are there other ways in which we can support the Kingdom - preaching work ?
Yes !
In addition to our labors of love , we can honor God by way of our voluntary contributions .
They are used to further the worldwide preaching work , which includes supporting missionaries and other special full - time servants .
In addition , the preparation and translation of literature and videos , the assistance with disaster relief efforts , and the construction of new Kingdom Halls are all cared for by our voluntary contributions .
We can be assured that “ the generous person will be blessed . ”
Moreover , when we give our valuable things to Jehovah , we honor him . ​ — Prov .
3 : 9 ; 22 : 9 .
As in the apostle Paul’s day , many today “ set something aside , ” or budget an amount of money , and place it in the congregation contribution box labeled “ Worldwide Work . ”
Each month , congregations forward these contributions to the office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves their branch territory .
It is also possible for you to send donations directly to a legal entity that is used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in the country where you reside .
To learn the name of the primary legal entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in the country where you live , please contact the branch office .
The address can be found on www.jw.org .
Depending on local conditions , the types of donations that you can send directly may include :
Donations via electronic bank transfer , debit card , or credit card .
In some branches this is also possible using jw.org or another designated website .
Donations of cash , jewelry , or other valuable personal property .
Include a letter indicating that the cash or the item is an outright donation .
Donations of cash with the condition that it can be returned if needed by the donor .
Include a letter stating that the donation is conditional .
In addition to gifts of money and valuable personal property , there are other ways to benefit Kingdom service worldwide . These are listed below .
Regardless of the method or methods you would like to use , please first contact the branch office that serves your branch territory to see which avenues are available .
Since legal requirements and tax laws vary , it is important to consult qualified tax and legal advisers before choosing the best way to donate .
Insurance and Retirement Plans : A donation made by specifying an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , individual retirement account , or a retirement / ​ pension plan .
Bank Accounts : Bank accounts may be made payable on death to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in accord with local bank requirements .

Stocks and Bonds : Stocks and bonds donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as an outright gift or by means of a written agreement to transfer on death .
Real Estate : Salable real estate donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses , either by making an outright gift or , in the case of residential property , by reserving a life estate to the donor , who can continue to live in the residence during his or her lifetime .
Wills and Trusts : Property or money may be bequeathed to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses by means of a legally executed will or by specifying the entity as the beneficiary of a trust agreement .
This arrangement may provide certain tax advantages .
As the term “ charitable planning ” implies , these types of donations typically require some planning on the part of the donor .
To assist individuals desiring to benefit the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses through some form of charitable giving , a brochure entitled Charitable Planning to Benefit Kingdom Service Worldwide has been prepared in English and Spanish .
The brochure was written to provide information on a variety of ways that gifts may be made now or later , such as through a bequest at death .
The information covered in this brochure may not apply fully to your situation because of tax laws or other laws in the country where you reside .
By using such methods of charitable giving , many have helped to support our religious and humanitarian activities worldwide and maximize tax benefits .
If available in the country where you reside , the brochure may be obtained by requesting a copy from the secretary of the local congregation .
For more information , select the link “ Make a Donation to Our Worldwide Work ” at the bottom of any page on jw.org , or contact the branch office .
“ Look out that no one takes you captive by means of the philosophy and empty deception . . . of the world . ” ​ — COL .
2 : 8 .
SONGS : 38 , 31
What loving counsel did the apostle Paul give about worldly thinking ?
What is an example of worldly thinking , and how can we reject it ?
How has the information in this article helped you ?
What counsel did the apostle Paul write to fellow Christians ?
( See opening picture . )
THE apostle Paul wrote his letter to Christians in Colossae evidently at the end of his first confinement in Rome , or about 60 - 61 C.E .
He mentioned to them the importance of acquiring “ spiritual comprehension . ”
Paul further stated : “ I am saying this so that no one may delude you with persuasive arguments .
Look out that no one takes you captive by means of the philosophy and empty deception according to human tradition , according to the elementary things of the world and not according to Christ . ”
Paul went on to explain why some popular ideas were wrong and why worldly thinking may be appealing to imperfect people .
For example , it may make a person feel wise and superior to others .
The letter was aimed at helping the brothers to reject worldly thinking and wrong practices . ​ — Col .
2 : 16 , 17 , 23 .
Why will we consider examples of worldly thinking ?
Worldly thinking ignores or belittles Jehovah’s guidelines , and its influence could gradually weaken our faith .
Today , we all are exposed to worldly thinking .
It is promoted on television , on the Internet , at work , or at school .
In this article , we will examine what we can do to prevent such thinking from corrupting our mind .
We will consider five examples of worldly thinking and discuss how we can reject these ideas .
What idea is appealing to many people , and why ?
“ I can be a good person without believing in God . ”
In many countries , it is not unusual to hear people say that they do not believe in God ; they consider themselves to be nonreligious .
They may not have examined the question of God’s existence carefully , but they are drawn to the idea of being free to do as they please .
( Read Psalm 10 : 4 . )
Others may feel worldly - wise when they say , “ I can have high principles without believing in God . ”
How could we reason with someone who claims that there is no Creator ?
Is the claim of unbelievers that there is no Creator based on logical reasoning ?
When looking to science to determine whether life was created , a person can easily get lost in a fog of information .
But in reality , the answer is simple .
If a building needs someone to construct it , how much more so do living things !
Actually , the most basic living cells on earth are far more complex than any house because they can do what no house can do ​ — reproduce .
So these cells have a way to store and copy the information needed to replicate themselves .
Where did the design for living cells come from ?
The Bible answers : “ Every house is constructed by someone , but the one who constructed all things is God . ” ​ — Heb .
3 : 4 .
What can we say about the notion that an individual can determine what is good without believing in God ?
How can we reason about the notion that a person can determine what is good without believing in God ?
God’s Word acknowledges that unbelievers may have certain commendable principles .
For example , they may respect and love their parents .
But how well - founded are the moral standards of someone who refuses to acknowledge our loving Creator as the One who sets the standards of right and wrong ?
Many thinking people today will admit that the deplorable conditions on earth confirm that man needs God’s help .
( Read Jeremiah 10 : 23 . )
So we should not be tempted to think that someone could fully determine what is good without believing in God and adhering to his standards . ​ — Ps .
146 : 3 .
What view of religion do many people have ?
“ You can be happy without religion . ”
This example of worldly thinking appeals to many people because they view religion as dull and irrelevant .
Also , many religions turn people away from God by teaching hellfire , collecting tithes , or preaching politics .
No wonder an increasing number of people feel that they can be happy without religion !
Such individuals may say , “ I am interested in spiritual matters , but I do not get involved in organized religion . ”
How does true religion promote happiness ?
Is it really true that one can be happy without religion ?
Certainly an individual can be happy without false religion , but a person cannot be truly happy unless he has a relationship with Jehovah , who is described as “ the happy God . ”
Everything God does benefits others .
His servants are happy because they focus on helping others .
For example , consider how true worship promotes family happiness .
True worship teaches us to honor and respect our spouse , to treat marriage vows as sacred , to avoid adultery , to raise respectful children , and to practice true love .
As a result , such worship unites people in happy congregations and a happy worldwide brotherhood . ​ — Read Isaiah 65 : 13 , 14 .
How can we use Matthew 5 : 3 to reason on the question , What makes people happy ?
How can we analyze the worldly idea that one can be happy without serving God ?
Consider this question , What makes people happy ?
Some find satisfaction in a career , a sport , or a hobby . Others find satisfaction in caring for family or friends .
All those things can bring pleasure , but our life has a higher purpose that brings lasting happiness .
In contrast with animals , we can come to know our Creator and serve him faithfully .
We have been created in such a way that we find happiness in doing so .
( Read Matthew 5 : 3 . )
For example , true worshippers find delight and derive much encouragement from meeting together to worship Jehovah .
They also enjoy a united brotherhood , a wholesome lifestyle , and a happy hope .
( a ) What idea about sex is common in this world ?
( b ) Why does God’s Word forbid sex outside marriage ?
“ Why condemn sex outside marriage ? ”
People may say to us : “ Life is to be enjoyed . Why condemn having sex outside marriage ? ”
The suggestion that a Christian should tolerate sexual immorality is wrong . Why ?
Because God’s Word forbids sexual immorality .
* ( Read 1 Thessalonians 4 : 3 - 8 . )
Jehovah has the right to make laws for us because he created us .
The law of God that permits sexual relations only between a man and a woman who are married to each other is part of what defines the marriage arrangement .
God gives us laws because he loves us .
They benefit us .
Families who obey them enjoy love , respect , and security .
God does not tolerate willful disobedience to his law . ​ — Heb .
13 : 4 .
How can a Christian keep far away from sexual immorality ?
God’s Word teaches us how to keep far away from sexual immorality .
An important way to do so is by controlling what we look at .
Jesus stated : “ Everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart .
If , now , your right eye is making you stumble , tear it out and throw it away from you . ”
Therefore , a Christian will avoid looking at pornography or listening to music with immoral lyrics .
The apostle Paul wrote to fellow Christians : “ Deaden . . . your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality . ”
Further , we need to control what we think about and talk about . ​ — Eph .
5 : 3 - 5 .
Why can pursuing a secular career sound appealing ?
“ Pursuing a career is the key to happiness . ”
Many people urge us to pursue a secular career as our goal in life .
Such a career may promise status , authority , and wealth .
Because many make pursuing a career their main goal in life , a Christian might adopt the same way of thinking .
Is succeeding in a career the key to happiness ?
Is it true that succeeding in a secular career that offers power and prestige leads to lasting happiness ?
No .
Remember that the craving to control others and the longing to be admired are the desires that enticed Satan , but he is angry , not happy .
Compared to the lasting joy that comes from helping people to benefit from God’s wisdom so that they can gain everlasting life , a secular career can provide only limited satisfaction .
Moreover , the spirit of this world is intensely competitive .
It pushes people to outdo one another , breeds jealousy , and in the end , proves to be “ a chasing after the wind . ” ​ — Eccl .
4 : 4 .
( a ) How should we view secular pursuits ?
( b ) According to Paul’s letter to the Thessalonians , what gave him deep joy ?
True , we have to earn a living , and there is nothing wrong with choosing work we enjoy .
But our secular employment should not be the main thing in our life .
Jesus said : “ No one can slave for two masters ; for either he will hate the one and love the other , or he will stick to the one and despise the other .
You cannot slave for God and for Riches . ”
When we focus first on serving Jehovah and teaching others his Word , we experience incomparable joy .
The apostle Paul , for one , had that experience .
Earlier in life , he had pursued a promising career in Judaism , but he found true happiness when he became a disciple - maker and witnessed how people responded to God’s message and how it changed their life .
( Read 1 Thessalonians 2 : 13 , 19 , 20 . )
No other career offers satisfaction like that .
Lasting joy comes from helping people to benefit from God’s wisdom ( See paragraphs 12 , 13 )
Why may the idea that man can solve his own problems sound appealing ?
“ Humans can solve their own problems . ”
This worldly idea may sound appealing to many people .
Why ?
If it were true , it would mean that man does not need God’s guidance and that man can do as he pleases .
Also , the idea that man can solve his own problems may sound convincing because ​ — according to some studies — ​ war , crime , disease , and poverty are all decreasing .
One report states : “ The reason humanity is getting better is because humans have decided to make the world a better place . ”
Does a comment like that indicate that man is coming to grips with the problems that have plagued him for so long ?
To answer , let us consider those problems more closely .
What facts underline the gravity of mankind’s problems ?
Wars : The two world wars took an estimated 60 million or more lives .
Since the end of World War II , mankind has certainly not learned to avoid war .
By 2015 , the number of people displaced from their homes by war or persecution had grown to some 65 million .
An estimated 12.4 million people were displaced during 2015 alone .
Crime : Although certain types of crime have decreased in some places , other types , such as cybercrime , domestic violence , and terrorism are increasing at an alarming rate .
In addition , many people believe that global corruption has worsened .
Mankind is not able to eliminate crime . Disease : Some diseases have been controlled .
But a report published in 2013 noted that each year a staggering nine million people under the age of 60 die from heart disease , stroke , cancer , respiratory disease , and diabetes .
Poverty : According to the World Bank , the number of those suffering extreme poverty in Africa alone has grown from 280 million in 1990 to 330 million in 2012 .

( a ) Why can only God’s Kingdom solve mankind’s problems ?
( b ) What Kingdom blessings are foretold by Isaiah and a psalmist ?
The present economic and political systems are powered by selfish forces .
Clearly , such forces cannot eliminate war , crime , disease , and poverty ​ — only God’s Kingdom can .
Consider what Jehovah will do for mankind .


War : God’s Kingdom will eliminate such deep - seated causes of war as selfishness , corruption , patriotism , false religion , and Satan himself .
Crime : God’s Kingdom is already teaching millions to love and trust one another as no other government can .
Disease : Jehovah will bless his people with perfect health .
Poverty : Jehovah will eliminate it and will provide his people with spiritual and physical prosperity , a quality of life far more valuable than riches . ​ — Ps .
72 : 12 , 13 .
How can you reject worldly thinking ?
If you hear a worldly idea that seems to challenge your faith , research what God’s Word says on the subject and discuss the matter with an experienced fellow believer .
Consider why the idea may sound appealing , why such thinking is faulty , and how you can refute it .
Indeed , all of us can protect ourselves against worldly thinking by following the admonition that Paul gave to the congregation in Colossae : “ Go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside . . .
Know how you should answer each person . ” ​ — Col .
4 : 5 , 6 .
Many people do not realize that the passage found in some Bibles at John 7 : 53 – 8 : 11 is an addition that was not part of the original inspired writings .
On the basis of this passage , some have claimed that only a person without sin could find someone guilty of adultery .
But the law that God gave to the nation of Israel said : “ If a man is found lying down with a woman who is the wife of another man , both of them must die together . ” ​ — Deut .
22 : 22 .
“ Let no man deprive you of the prize . ” ​ — COL .
2 : 18 .
SONGS : 122 , 139
How can we protect ourselves against the enticement of immoral desires ?
How can love and kindness protect us from being deprived of the prize ?
How can we win the prize as a family ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) God’s servants look forward to what prize ?
( b ) What helps us to keep our eyes on the prize ?
( See opening picture . )
LIKE the apostle Paul , spirit - anointed Christians today have the precious prospect of receiving “ the prize of the upward call of God . ”
They look forward to serving with Jesus Christ in his heavenly Kingdom and sharing with him in bringing mankind to perfection .
What a wonderful goal such ones have been invited by God to pursue !
The other sheep have a different hope .
They look forward to gaining the prize of everlasting life on earth ​ — and what a happy prospect that is ! ​ — 2 Pet .
3 : 13 .
To help fellow anointed Christians to stay faithful and attain the prize , Paul urged them : “ Keep your minds fixed on the things above . ”
They were to keep in mind the precious hope of receiving their heavenly inheritance .
Indeed , contemplating the blessings that Jehovah sets before his people helps all of God’s servants to keep their eyes on the prize , whether they have the heavenly or the earthly hope . ​ — 1 Cor .
9 : 24 .
Paul alerted fellow Christians about what dangers ?

Paul also alerted fellow Christians about dangers that could deprive them of the prize .
For example , he wrote to the congregation in Colossae about false Christians who were trying to gain God’s favor through works of the Law rather than through faith in Christ .
Paul also discussed dangers that exist down to this day and that can deprive us of the prize .
For instance , he explained how to resist immoral desires , handle problems with fellow believers , and deal with family difficulties .
His counsel on these matters is valuable for us today .
Therefore , let us examine some of Paul’s loving warnings found in his letter to the Colossians .
Why can immoral desires deprive us of the prize ?
After reminding his brothers of their marvelous hope , Paul wrote : “ Deaden , therefore , your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality , uncleanness , uncontrolled sexual passion , hurtful desire , and greediness . ”

Immoral desires can be very powerful and can deprive us of spiritual treasures .
One brother who was swept away by immoral desires said after he returned to the congregation , “ I was drawn by a force so powerful that I did not turn back until it was too late . ”
How can we protect ourselves in dangerous situations ?
It is especially important to be on guard when we are confronted by circumstances that could tempt us to compromise Jehovah’s moral standards .
For example , it is wise for a couple , right from the start of a courtship , to set clear limits for themselves about such matters as touching , kissing , or being alone together .

Morally dangerous situations may also come up when a Christian is away from home on a business trip or when a Christian has to work with someone of the opposite sex .
If you find yourself in such a situation , identify yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , act in a respectable manner , and remember that flirting can have disastrous consequences .
We may also find ourselves at greater risk if we are depressed and vulnerable .
At such times , we may yearn for someone who makes us feel needed .
We may even become so desperate for emotional support that we will accept attention from just about anyone .
If that ever happens to you , turn to Jehovah and his people for help so as not to allow yourself to be deprived of the prize . ​ — Read Psalm 34 : 18 ; Proverbs 13 : 20 .
As to our choice of entertainment , what should we keep in mind ?
To deaden immoral desires , we need to reject immoral entertainment .
Much of the entertainment industry today has the characteristics of ancient Sodom and Gomorrah .
Industry leaders promote their ideas on morals by presenting sexual immorality as normal behavior , free of painful consequences .
We cannot let our guard down , passively accepting any entertainment that is offered .
We need to select forms of entertainment that will not hinder us from keeping our eyes on the prize of life . ​ — Prov .
4 : 23 .
What problems might we face within the Christian congregation ?
We all agree that being part of the Christian congregation is a blessing .
The study of God’s Word at our meetings and the kind and loving support that we give one another help us to keep our eyes focused on the prize .
Nevertheless , at times , misunderstandings may lead to some tension among members of the congregation .
If we fail to resolve such problems , they could easily lead to feelings of resentment . ​ — Read 1 Peter 3 : 8 , 9 .
8 , 9 . ( a ) Having what qualities will help us to win the prize ?
( b ) What can help us to preserve peace if a fellow Christian upsets us ?
How can we prevent resentment from depriving us of the prize ?
Paul urged the Colossians : “ As God’s chosen ones , holy and loved , clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion , kindness , humility , mildness , and patience .
Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another . Just as Jehovah freely forgave you , you must also do the same .
But besides all these things , clothe yourselves with love , for it is a perfect bond of union . ” ​ — Col .
3 : 12 - 14 .
Love and kindness can help us to be forgiving toward one another .
For example , if we feel hurt by the words or actions of a fellow Christian , we can try to recall occasions when we spoke or acted unkindly .
Do we not appreciate the love and kindness of the brothers and sisters who overlooked our errors ?
( Read Ecclesiastes 7 : 21 , 22 . )
Especially are we thankful for Christ’s kindness in gathering true worshippers into unity .
We all love the same God , preach the same message , and face many of the same challenges .
By kindly and lovingly forgiving one another , we contribute to Christian unity and keep our eyes on the prize of life .
10 , 11 . ( a ) Why is jealousy dangerous ?
( b ) How can we prevent jealousy from depriving us of our reward ?
Warning examples in the Bible remind us that jealousy can deprive us of the prize .
For instance , Cain became jealous of his brother Abel and killed him .
Korah , Dathan , and Abiram became jealous of Moses and opposed him .
Also , King Saul became jealous of David’s success and tried to kill him .
No wonder God’s Word states : “ Wherever there are jealousy and contentiousness , there will also be disorder and every vile thing . ” ​ — Jas .
3 : 16 . If we cultivate love and kindness in our heart , we will not easily become jealous .
God’s Word says : “ Love is patient and kind .
Love is not jealous . ”
To prevent jealousy from taking root in our heart , we must strive to see things from God’s standpoint , viewing our brothers and sisters as members of the same Christian body .
This will help us to show fellow feeling , in harmony with the inspired counsel : “ If a member is glorified , all the other members rejoice with it . ”
Thus , rather than feel jealous , we will be happy when others receive blessings .
Consider the example of King Saul’s son Jonathan .
He was not jealous when David was appointed heir to the throne .
Rather , he encouraged David .
Could we be as kind and loving as Jonathan ?
Heeding what Scriptural counsel will help us to attain the prize as a family ?
Applying Bible principles can bring peace and happiness to a family and help them to win the prize .
What Scriptural counsel for families did Paul give to Christians in Colossae ?
He stated : “ You wives , be in subjection to your husbands , as it is becoming in the Lord .
You husbands , keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry with them .
You children , be obedient to your parents in everything , for this is well - pleasing to the Lord .
You fathers , do not be exasperating your children , so that they do not become downhearted . ”
No doubt you will agree that applying Paul’s inspired counsel will still benefit husbands , wives , and children .
How could a Christian sister win over her unbelieving husband ?
What if you are a wife and you feel that your unbelieving husband does not treat you properly ?
Would you improve the situation by arguing about his behavior ?
Even if you succeed in making him do what you want , will you win him over to the truth ?

Not likely .
But if you show respect for your husband’s headship , you can contribute to peace in the family , you will praise Jehovah , and you may even win your husband over to true worship ; thus you both may gain the prize . ​ — Read 1 Peter 3 : 1 , 2 .
What should a Christian husband do if his unbelieving wife does not respect him ?
What if you are a husband and you feel that your unbelieving wife does not respect you ?
Would you move her to show you more respect if you were to shout at her to show her who is boss ?
Absolutely not !
God expects you to exercise headship lovingly , in imitation of Jesus .
Jesus exercises his headship over his congregation with loving patience .
By imitating Jesus ’ example , a husband may win his wife over to true worship .
How does a Christian man express his love for his wife ?
Husbands are told : “ Keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry with them . ”
A loving husband honors his wife by listening to her opinions and by assuring her that he values what she says .

Although he cannot always do as she asks , he often arrives at a more balanced decision by consulting her .
A loving husband tries to gain his wife’s respect by earning it rather than demanding it .
A husband who loves his wife and children is more likely to have a family that happily serves Jehovah and wins the prize of life .
How can we prevent family difficulties from depriving us of the prize ?
( See paragraphs 13 - 15 )
16 , 17 .
As a youth , how can you avoid becoming overly frustrated with your parents ?

What if you are a teenager and feel misunderstood and restricted by your Christian parents ?
Your frustration might even make you doubt that serving Jehovah is the best way of life .
But if you allow frustration to make you give up serving Jehovah , you would soon discover that no one else cares for you more genuinely than your God - fearing parents and your congregation .
If your parents never corrected you , would you not wonder if they really cared about you ?
But perhaps it is the way your parents discipline you that upsets you .
Rather than fret over the manner of discipline , try to recognize that there may be a reason for the way they act .
So keep calm and do your best to avoid overreacting to criticism .
God’s Word says : “ A man of knowledge restrains his words , and a discerning man will remain calm . ”
Make it your goal to become a mature person who can take counsel calmly , benefiting from it without worrying excessively about how it was given .
To have believing parents who truly love Jehovah is a blessing .
They will surely want to help you to win the prize of life .
Why are you resolved to keep your eyes on the prize ?
The prize before us ​ — whether immortal life in heaven or everlasting life on a paradise earth — ​ is marvelous to contemplate .
It is a sure hope , one based on the promise of the Creator himself .
Regarding the Paradise earth , God says : “ The earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah . ” Everyone then living on earth will be taught by God .
That is surely a prize worth striving for .
So keep your mind on what Jehovah has promised , and let nothing deprive you of the prize !
“ I WAS nervous about moving here , ” says Allen .
* “ I didn’t know if I would make friends or be accepted . ”
Allen is adapting to a new congregation nearly 900 miles ( over 1,400 km ) away from home .
If you have moved to a different congregation , you too may be apprehensive .
What can help you to adjust ?
What can you do if the adjustment is harder than you expected ?
On the other hand , if you are not moving , how might you make the change easier for newcomers ?
Think of this example : When trees are relocated , they experience stress .
As a tree is removed from the ground , most of its roots are usually cut off to make it easier to transport .
Once transplanted , the tree must immediately start growing new roots .
Similarly , moving to another congregation may have caused you to experience stress .
In your previous congregation , you had grown “ roots ” as you developed cherished friendships and settled into a familiar spiritual routine .
Now you must grow new roots in order to flourish in a new environment .
What will help you to do so ?
Applying Scriptural principles .
Let us consider some .
The person who regularly reads God’s Word is “ like a tree planted by streams of water , a tree that produces fruit in its season , the foliage of which does not wither .
And everything he does will succeed . ” ​ — Ps .
1 : 1 - 3 .
Just as a tree must regularly draw from a water source to remain healthy , a Christian must regularly feed on God’s Word to remain spiritually strong . Therefore , continue to read the Bible daily and to attend congregation meetings regularly .
Maintain your good habits of family worship and personal study .
Whatever you needed spiritually in your previous location , you will need in your new one too .
“ Whoever refreshes others will himself be refreshed . ” ​ — Prov .
11 : 25 .
You will be invigorated and will adapt quicker when you share fully in the ministry .
“ What aided my wife and me the most was to auxiliary pioneer soon after we arrived in our new congregation , ” says Kevin , a Christian elder .
“ We quickly got to know the brothers , the pioneers , and the territory . ”
Roger , who moved to an area over 1,000 miles ( over 1,600 km ) away from where he lived , says : “ The best way to adapt to a new congregation is to go in field service as often as possible .
Also , let the elders know that you are available to assist in any way , perhaps by cleaning the Kingdom Hall , substituting for a meeting part , or offering to give someone a ride to the meetings .
When the brothers and sisters see someone new with a self - sacrificing spirit , they take you in . ”
“ Open your hearts wide . ” ​ — 2 Cor .
6 : 13 .
Widen out in your brotherly affection .
After Melissa and her family moved to a new congregation , they concentrated on making new friends .
“ We mingled at the Kingdom Hall before and after meetings , ” she says .
“ That allowed time to converse beyond just saying a simple greeting . ”
This also helped the family to learn new names more quickly .
In addition , they widened out by extending hospitality , which strengthened the new bonds of friendship .
“ We exchanged phone numbers , ” she adds , “ so we could be reached and included in spiritual and other activities . ”
If you are overwhelmed by the thought of meeting new people , you can start in small ways .
For example , smile ​ — even if you do not feel like it at first .
A smile will draw others to you .
After all , “ a cheerful glance makes the heart rejoice . ”
“ I am reserved by nature , ” says Rachel , who moved far away from where she grew up .
“ Sometimes I have to force myself to talk to the brothers and sisters in my new congregation .
I look for someone who is sitting down in the Kingdom Hall , not talking to anyone . That person may be just as shy as I am . ”
Why not set the goal to converse with someone new before or after every meeting ?
On the other hand , you may be excited to meet new people for the first few weeks .
But then the “ newness ” can wear off as time goes by .
At that point , you may need to exert yourself to continue to make new friends .
Trees that are relocated experience stress , but when they are transplanted , they grow new roots
Some trees take longer than others to become firmly rooted in a new environment .
Likewise , not everyone adapts to a new congregation at the same pace .
If you moved some time ago but you are still struggling to adjust , applying these Bible principles can help :
“ Let us not give up in doing what is fine , for in due time we will reap if we do not tire out . ” ​ — Gal .
6 : 9 .
Allow more time to adjust than you originally expected .
For example , many Gilead - trained missionaries stay in their foreign assignment for several years before going back to their country of origin for a visit .
Doing so helps them to bond with the local brothers and to adjust to a different culture .
Alejandro , who has moved several times , knows that the adjustment process cannot be rushed .
He relates : “ After our last move , my wife said , ‘ All my friends are in our previous congregation ! ’ ”
He reminded her that she had said exactly the same thing two years earlier ​ — the last time they moved .
But during those two years , she showed interest in others and strangers became close friends .
“ Do not say , ‘ Why were the former days better than these ? ’
for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this . ” ​ — Eccl .
7 : 10 .
Avoid comparing your new congregation with your previous one .

For example , the brothers in your new congregation may be more reserved or more outspoken than you are used to .
Focus on their positive traits , just as you want them to focus on yours .
Some newcomers realized to their surprise that their move forced them to ask themselves , ‘ Do I truly love “ the whole association of brothers ” ? ’ ​ — 1 Pet .
2 : 17 .
“ Keep on asking , and it will be given you . ” ​ — Luke 11 : 9 .
Continue to pray for help .
“ Don’t just tough it out , ” says David , an elder .
“ Many things we can do only with Jehovah’s help .
Pray about it ! ”
Rachel , quoted earlier , agrees .
“ If my husband and I feel a little disconnected from the congregation , ” she says , “ we pray specifically to Jehovah , ‘ Please let us know if we are doing something that makes it hard for others to be drawn to us . ’
Then we try to spend more time with the brothers and sisters . ”
Parents , if your children are struggling to fit in , take time to pray with them about this matter .
Help them to make new friends by arranging opportunities for upbuilding association .
What can you do to help newcomers who have moved into your congregation ?
Strive to be a true friend from the start .
To do so , try to imagine what things you would appreciate if you were a new arrival , and then do those things .
Could new ones join you for family worship or for the monthly JW Broadcasting program ?
Could you invite them to accompany you in the ministry ?
If you share a simple meal together , they will long remember your hospitality .
What further practical help can you give to newcomers ?
“ When we arrived in our new congregation , ” says Carlos , “ a sister gave us a list of stores that have reasonable prices .
That helped a lot . ”
Those arriving from a location with a different climate may be grateful to learn how to dress in your hot , cold , or rainy weather .
You could also help them to be more effective in their ministry by relating to them the history of the community or by explaining the local religious beliefs .
Allen , mentioned in the introduction , has been in his new congregation for over a year .
He reflects : “ I had to push myself at first to get to know the brothers and sisters .
But now they feel more like family , and I am happy . ”
Allen realizes that by moving , he did not lose any friends . Instead , he gained new ones , who will likely remain his friends for life .
Some names have been changed .
The elders want you to enjoy your new congregation , and they are ready to assist .
The Congregation Service Committee should promptly assign you to a field service group .
The secretary will no doubt ask you for contact information from your previous congregation so that he can obtain your Congregation’s Publisher Record card ( s ) .
Your new field service group overseer should endeavor to share with you in the ministry soon after your arrival .
It would be good if he also made a friendly shepherding call on your family .
The elders should request your emergency contact information so that they can reach you if a disaster strikes .
It would be good if the elders also verified that your medical directive card is updated .
3 “ I Know He Will Rise ”
8 “ I Have Hope Toward God ”
What past events gave Christians a basis for confidence that there will be a resurrection ?
How should those events and the convictions held by other faithful ones of the past affect your hope ?
These articles should strengthen your belief in the resurrection .
13 Do You Remember ?
14 Questions From Readers
16 Questions From Readers
18 Parents ​ — Help Your Children Become “ Wise for Salvation ”
23 Young Ones ​ — “ Keep Working Out Your Own Salvation ”
Among the thousands who get baptized each year are young ones ​ — teenagers and preteens .
Baptism opens the door to many blessings ; it also involves responsibility .
Parents , how can you help your children reach out for the goal of baptism ?
Baptized young ones and those who are contemplating baptism , how can you strengthen your relationship with Jehovah ?
28 Life Story ​ — Leaving Things Behind to Follow the Master
32 Subject Index for The Watchtower 2017
“ Our friend has fallen asleep , but I am traveling there to awaken him . ” ​ — JOHN 11 : 11 .
SONGS : 142 , 129
What Bible accounts gave Martha confidence in the resurrection ?
How can we be sure that there is a basis for a future resurrection ?
Like Martha , what joyful event are you looking forward to ?
What was Martha confident about regarding her brother ?
( See opening picture . )
JESUS ’ close friend and disciple Martha was grieving .
Her brother , Lazarus , had died . Could anything ease her sorrow ?
Yes . Jesus assured her : “ Your brother will rise . ”
That may not have erased all her sadness ; yet , Martha accepted Jesus ’ assurance .
She said : “ I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day . ”
She was sure that would occur in the future .
Jesus then performed a miracle .
He brought Lazarus back to life that very day .
Why would you like to have the conviction that Martha had ?
We have no basis to expect that Jesus or his Father will now perform such a miracle for us .
Are you , though , just as sure as Martha was of a future resurrection for a loved one ?
Maybe it is your deceased mate , your mother , your father , or a beloved grandparent .
Or you may be grieving over the loss of a child .
You long to hug , to speak with , and to laugh with that dear one .
Happily , like Martha , you have good reason to say , ‘ I know that my loved one will rise in the resurrection . ’
Still , it will do each Christian good to reflect on why that is a valid conviction .
3 , 4 .
How might Martha’s conviction have been strengthened by what Jesus had recently done ?
It is unlikely that Martha , living near Jerusalem , observed Jesus resurrect the son of a widow near Nain in Galilee .
Yet , she had probably heard about it .
And it is similar with Jesus ’ bringing Jairus ’ daughter back to life .
Those at the girl’s house “ knew she had died . ”
Still , Jesus took her lifeless hand and said : “ Child , get up ! ”
And she did , immediately .
Both Martha and her sister , Mary , were aware that Jesus could cure the sick .
For that reason , they felt that had Jesus been present , Lazarus would not have died .
Now that Jesus ’ dear friend was dead , though , what did the future hold ?
Note that Martha spoke of Lazarus ’ coming back to life in the future , “ on the last day . ”
Why could she be certain of that ?
And why can you be sure that there will be a future resurrection that may include your loved ones ?
There are good reasons for your conviction .
As we review some of them , you might find things in God’s Word that you do not often link with your valid hope of seeing your loved one again .
What contributed to Martha’s confidence that Lazarus would be resurrected ?
Note that Martha did not say : ‘ I hope that my brother will rise . ’
She said : “ I know he will rise . ”
Martha was convinced because of miracles that she likely learned about even before Jesus ’ ministry began .
She had learned of these as a youth at home and at the synagogue .
Three accounts recorded in the inspired Scriptures may come to mind .
Elijah performed what outstanding miracle , and how does that relate to Martha ?
The first resurrection occurred at a time when God was empowering his prophet Elijah to work miracles .
Up in Zarephath , a Phoenician coastal town , a poor widow showed hospitality to the prophet .
God then miraculously maintained her supply of flour and oil , so that she and her son stayed alive .
Later , her son got sick and died .

Elijah came to her aid .
While touching the corpse , Elijah prayed : “ God , please , let this child’s life come back into him . ”
And it happened ! God heard Elijah , and the child came back to life .
That was the first resurrection of Bible record .
( Read 1 Kings 17 : 17 - 24 . )
Martha had certainly learned of that remarkable event .
7 , 8 . ( a ) Relate what Elisha did to relieve a woman’s grief . ( b ) What does Elisha’s miracle prove about Jehovah ?
The second resurrection related in the Scriptures was performed by Elijah’s successor , the prophet Elisha .
A prominent Israelite woman in Shunem showed Elisha exceptional hospitality .
Through the prophet , God rewarded this childless woman and her elderly husband with a son .
Some years later , the boy died .


Imagine the mother’s crushing grief .
With her husband’s permission , she traveled about 19 miles ( 30 km ) to Elisha at Mount Carmel .
The prophet sent his attendant Gehazi back to Shunem ahead of them .
Gehazi was not able to bring the dead boy back to life .
Then the grieving mother arrived with Elisha . ​ — 2 Ki .
4 : 8 - 31 .
There by the body at the house in Shunem , Elisha prayed .
Miraculously , the dead boy came to life and was reunited with his now elated mother !

( Read 2 Kings 4 : 32 - 37 . )
She might well have recalled what formerly barren Hannah had prayed when she brought Samuel to serve at the tabernacle : “ Jehovah . . . brings down to the Grave , and he raises up . ”
Clearly , God in a very literal way raised up the boy in Shunem , proving His ability to resurrect .
Explain how Elisha was involved in the third resurrection related in the Bible .
But that was not the final startling event involving Elisha .
He had served for over 50 years as a prophet , and then he “ became ill with the sickness from which he eventually died . ”
Later , when Elisha’s body had been reduced to mere bones , an enemy band came into the land .

Some Israelites were on their way to bury a man .
Rushing to escape their enemies , they threw the dead man into the grave or tomb where Elisha’s bones lay .
We read : “ When the man touched the bones of Elisha , he came to life and stood on his feet . ”
Think what those resurrection accounts would have meant to Martha ! God definitely has power over death .
And reflect on what they should mean to you . They certainly should convince you that God’s power is vast , unlimited .
How did Peter help a Christian sister who had died ?
In the Christian Greek Scriptures , we also read that resurrections took place in the presence of God’s representatives .
We can see that from the resurrections Jesus performed when outside of Nain and when in the home of Jairus .
The apostle Peter was responsible for another one , that of the Christian woman Dorcas ( Tabitha ) .
Peter came to where her body was awaiting burial .
While near the corpse , Peter prayed .
Then , he said : “ Tabitha , rise ! ”
She came to life right away , and Peter “ presented her alive ” to fellow Christians .
That event was so convincing that “ many became believers in the Lord . ”
They could testify both in general about the Lord and specifically about Jehovah’s ability to raise the dead . ​ — Acts 9 : 36 - 42 .
What did the physician Luke report happened to a young man , and how did that affect others ?
Others became eyewitnesses to another resurrection .
One time , the apostle Paul was at a meeting in an upper room in Troas , in what is now northwest Turkey .


Paul spoke till midnight .
A young man named Eutychus was listening , seated at a window .
But he dozed off and fell from the third story to the ground below .
Perhaps the physician Luke was the first to reach Eutychus , and Luke made a medical assessment : Eutychus was not merely injured and unconscious ​ — he was dead !
Paul came downstairs and embraced the corpse , and then he made the dramatic announcement : “ He is alive . ”
What a profound impact that would have had on eyewitnesses !
Knowing the facts and grasping that a resurrection had occurred , they “ were comforted beyond measure . ” ​ — Acts 20 : 7 - 12 .
12 , 13 .
In the light of the resurrections discussed , what questions do we need to consider ?
The accounts mentioned above should give you something that Martha had .
That is , assurance that our God and Life - Giver has the ability to bring a dead person back to life .
It is interesting , though , that a faithful servant of God , such as Elijah , Jesus , or Peter , was present on each of those occasions , during the time when Jehovah was performing miracles .
What can we say , however , about those who died at other times in history ?
If in a certain era God was not performing resurrections , could faithful men and women expect that God would raise the dead at a future time ?
Could they feel as did Martha , who said : “ I know [ my brother ] will rise in the resurrection on the last day ” ?

Just why could she believe that , and why can you ?
There are actually a number of passages in God’s inspired Word that show that Jehovah’s loyal servants knew that a future time of resurrection was in store .
Consider a few .
We can learn what about the resurrection from the account about Abraham ?
Think of what God told Abraham to do with Isaac , the long - awaited heir .
Jehovah said : “ Take , please , your son , your only son whom you so love , Isaac , and . . . offer him up . . . as a burnt offering . ”
Imagine the feelings that such a command would stir up .
Jehovah had promised that through Abraham’s offspring all nations would be blessed .
Also , Jehovah said that the blessing would come “ through Isaac . ”
But how could that occur if Abraham put Isaac to death as a sacrifice ?
Paul was inspired to explain that Abraham believed that God was able to raise Isaac from the dead .
( Read Hebrews 11 : 17 - 19 . )
The Bible does not say that Abraham felt that if he obeyed , in a mere few hours , a day , or a week , Isaac would come back to life .
Abraham could not know when his son would be raised to life again . But he trusted that Jehovah would resurrect Isaac .
What hope did the patriarch Job express ?
The patriarch Job similarly looked to a future resurrection .
He realized that if a mere tree is cut down , it might sprout again and be like a new plant .
Not so with a man .
If a man dies , he cannot raise himself up from the grave and live again .
Of course , that did not mean that God could not resurrect a person .
In fact , Job believed that Jehovah would set a time to remember him .
( Read Job 14 : 13 - 15 . )
Job could not know when in the future that time would be .
Still , he trusted that the One who created human life in the first place could and would remember him and resurrect him .
An angel gave the prophet Daniel what encouragement ?
Daniel is another faithful man whom we know about from the Hebrew Scriptures .
He served God loyally for many decades , and Jehovah supported him .
At one point , an angelic messenger urged Daniel , that “ very precious man , ” to “ have peace ” and “ be strong . ” ​ — Dan .
9 : 22 , 23 ; 10 : 11 , 18 , 19 .
17 , 18 .
Daniel was given what promise about his future ?
Daniel was almost 100 years old and nearing the end of his life . He might have been thinking about what the future held for him .
Would Daniel get to live again ?
Absolutely !
At the end of the book of Daniel , we read God’s assurance to him : “ As for you , go on to the end .

You will rest . ”

Elderly Daniel knew that the dead are at rest , with no “ planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave . ”
Daniel would soon be going there .
But that would not be the end of him .
He was promised a future .
The message to the prophet Daniel continued : “ You will stand up for your lot at the end of the days . ”
No date or length of time was given . Daniel was to come to his end in death and then rest .
Yet , saying that he would ‘ stand up for his lot ’ in the future amounted to a clear promise of a resurrection to come ​ — long after he had died .
That would be “ at the end of the days . ”
The Jerusalem Bible renders the promise to Daniel : “ You will rise for your share at the end of time . ”
Like Martha , you can be confident about the resurrection ( See paragraphs 19 , 20 )
19 , 20 . ( a ) How does what we have considered so far relate to Martha’s statement to Jesus ?
( b ) What will we yet consider ?
Martha clearly had reason to be confident that her faithful brother , Lazarus , would “ rise in the resurrection on the last day . ”
The promise given to Daniel , as well as the certainty reflected in Martha’s reply to Jesus , should reassure Christians today . There will be a resurrection .
We have seen that actual events in the past prove that a resurrection is possible ​ — the dead can be brought back to life .
And men and women who served God anticipated that a resurrection would occur sometime in the future .
Is there any indication , however , that a resurrection could take place long after it was promised ?
If so , that would give us added reason to look forward , as Martha did , to a time of resurrection .
Still , when would that happen ?
Let us address these aspects in the following article .
“ The last Adam became a life - giving spirit . ” ​ — 1 COR .
15 : 45 .
SONGS : 151 , 147
How does Psalm 118 bear out that a resurrection can occur long after being foretold ?
How did Psalm 16 : 10 find fulfillment ?
What does the Bible indicate would happen regarding the resurrection during Christ’s presence ?
1 - 3 . ( a ) What should we include among our core beliefs ?
( b ) Why is the resurrection so important ?
( See opening picture . )
IF YOU were asked , ‘ What are the key teachings of your faith ? ’ what would you say ?
Surely you would stress that Jehovah is the Creator and Life - Giver . You would likely mention your belief in Jesus Christ , who died as a ransom .
And you would happily add that an earthly paradise is ahead , where God’s people will live forever .
But would you mention the resurrection as one of your most cherished beliefs ?
We have good reasons to include the resurrection as a key teaching even if we personally hope to survive the great tribulation and live on earth forever .
The apostle Paul showed why the resurrection is central to our faith : “ If , indeed , there is no resurrection of the dead , then Christ has not been raised up . ”
Had Christ not been resurrected , he would not be our ruling King , and our teaching about Christ’s rule would be in vain .
( Read 1 Corinthians 15 : 12 - 19 . )
However , we know that Jesus was resurrected .
In holding that conviction , we differ from the Jewish Sadducees , who strongly denied that the dead are raised .
Even in the face of mockery , we hold firm to our belief in the resurrection . ​ — Mark 12 : 18 ; Acts 4 : 2 , 3 ; 17 : 32 ; 23 : 6 - 8 .
When Paul wrote of “ the primary doctrine about the Christ , ” he included “ the teaching on . . . the resurrection of the dead . ”
And Paul stressed the resurrection as something he had faith in .
But the fact that the resurrection is included as a primary doctrine , one of the “ elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God , ” does not mean that it is a simplistic teaching .
Why not ?

What questions might arise regarding the resurrection ?
As people begin to study the Bible , most read accounts of past resurrections , such as the raising of Lazarus .
And they learn that Abraham , Job , and Daniel were confident that in the future the dead would live again .
Still , how would you respond if asked for evidence that resurrection promises are valid many years or even centuries after they were made ?
And does the Bible really indicate when the resurrection will take place ?
Those aspects have a bearing on our faith , so let us see what we find in the Scriptures .
What aspect of the resurrection will we first address ?
It is one thing to imagine bringing to life a person who recently died .
Yet , what of a promise that a resurrection will occur years , even centuries , in the future ?
Could you rely on such a long - term promise , whether the promise was about someone who just died or one who had been dead for a long time ?
Actually , a resurrection that was promised centuries in advance did take place , and you put faith in it .
How so ?
And how does that relate to what you can expect regarding a future resurrection ?
How was Jesus involved in the fulfillment of Psalm 118 ?
With regard to a resurrection being foretold long in advance , consider Psalm 118 , which some feel that David composed .

It includes the plea : “ Jehovah , save us , please , we beg ! . . .
Blessed is the one who comes in the name of Jehovah . ”
You likely recall that people quoted this Messianic passage when Jesus rode into Jerusalem on Nisan 9 , shortly before his death .
But how did Psalm 118 point to a resurrection that would occur many years in the future ?

Note what else that prophetic psalm said : “ The stone that the builders rejected has become the chief cornerstone . ” ​ — Ps .
118 : 22 .
“ The builders rejected ” the Messiah ( See paragraph 7 )
To what extent did the Jews reject Jesus ?
“ The builders , ” the Jewish leaders , rejected the Messiah .
Their rejection was far more than just turning their backs on Jesus or refusing to accept him as the Christ .
Many Jews rejected him to the point of clamoring for his death .
Yes , they contributed to Jesus ’ being killed .
Jesus was resurrected to be “ the chief cornerstone ” ( See paragraphs 8 , 9 )
How could Jesus become “ the chief cornerstone ” ?
If Jesus was rejected and killed , how could he become “ the chief cornerstone ” ?
That could come about only by his being resurrected to life again .
Jesus himself made such a connection .

He gave a parable in which cultivators mistreated those whom the owner sent to them , just as the Israelites mistreated the prophets whom God sent to them .
Finally , in the illustration , the owner sent his beloved son and heir .
Was the son accepted ?
Far from it .
The cultivators went to the extreme of putting him to death .
Jesus followed that illustration with a reference to the prophetic statement at Psalm 118 : 22 , which he quoted .
The apostle Peter made a similar connection when speaking to Jewish “ rulers , elders , and scribes gathered together in Jerusalem . ”
He spoke of “ Jesus Christ the Nazarene , whom you executed on a stake but whom God raised up from the dead . ”
Thereupon , Peter clearly stated : “ This is ‘ the stone that was treated by you builders as of no account that has become the chief cornerstone . ’ ” ​ — Acts 3 : 15 ; 4 : 5 - 11 ; 1 Pet .
2 : 5 - 7 .
Psalm 118 : 22 pointed to what outstanding event ?
Yes , hundreds of years in advance , the prophetic statement at Psalm 118 : 22 indicated that a resurrection would occur .
The Messiah would be rejected and die , but he would be raised to life again to be the chief cornerstone .
This resurrected Son thus became the only one whose name was “ given among men by which we must get saved . ” ​ — Acts 4 : 12 ; Eph .
1 : 20 .
( a ) What did Psalm 16 : 10 foretell ?
( b ) Why can we be sure that Psalm 16 : 10 was not fulfilled in David ?

Consider another verse that pointed forward to a resurrection .
It was written over a thousand years in advance , a fact that should reinforce your confidence that a resurrection can occur long after it was foretold or promised .
In Psalm 16 , which is attributed to David , we read : “ You will not leave me in the Grave .
You will not allow your loyal one to see the pit . ”
David was not saying that he would never die or be in the common grave of mankind .
God’s Word is plain that David did grow old .
After he died , he “ was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the City of David . ”
What , then , is Psalm 16 : 10 saying ?
When did Peter comment on Psalm 16 : 10 ?
We are not left in the dark .
Over a millennium after that psalm was written and weeks after Jesus died and was raised , Peter spoke to thousands of Jews and proselytes about Psalm 16 : 10 .

( Read Acts 2 : 29 - 32 . )
He mentioned that David had indeed died and been buried .
Those listening to Peter knew that . And the record does not say that any of them disputed Peter’s statement that David “ foresaw and spoke about the resurrection ” of the coming Messiah .
In what way was Psalm 16 : 10 fulfilled , confirming what about the promise of the resurrection ?
Peter reinforced his point by quoting David’s statement at Psalm 110 : 1 .
( Read Acts 2 : 33 - 36 . )
Peter’s reasoning in line with the Scriptures helped to convince the large crowd that Jesus was “ both Lord and Christ . ”
More to the point , the people acknowledged that Psalm 16 : 10 was fulfilled when Jesus was resurrected from the dead .
Later , the apostle Paul drew on the same solid reasoning when speaking to Jews in the city of Antioch in Pisidia .
His argument impressed them , and they wanted to hear more .
( Read Acts 13 : 32 - 37 , 42 . )
It should also impress us that those Bible prophecies about a coming resurrection were trustworthy , even though centuries had passed since that miracle was foretold .
What question about the resurrection might arise ?
We should be encouraged that a resurrection can occur many centuries after being promised .
Still , someone might wonder : ‘ Does that mean that I may have to wait a long time to see my loved one ?
When will the resurrection that I am hoping for occur ? ’
Well , Jesus did tell his apostles that there were things they did not and could not know .
There are details about “ the times or seasons that the Father has placed in his own jurisdiction . ”
However , this does not mean that we have no information about the timing of the resurrection .
How did the resurrection of Jesus differ from earlier ones ?
As a basis for understanding that , recall what resurrections the Bible foretells .
The most important one , of course , is that of Jesus .
Had he not been raised , none of us would have any prospect of seeing our dead loved ones again . Those who were raised before Jesus , such as by Elijah and Elisha , did not live on endlessly .
They died again and saw corruption in the grave . In contrast , Jesus “ has been raised up from the dead , [ and ] dies no more ; death is no longer master over him . ”
In heaven , he lives “ forever and ever , ” never seeing corruption . ​ — Rom .
6 : 9 ; Rev .
1 : 5 , 18 ; Col .
1 : 18 ; 1 Pet .
3 : 18 .
Why is it significant that Jesus is “ the firstfruits ” ?
The resurrection of Jesus was the first of that sort , and it undoubtedly is first in importance . He is not , though , the only one promised to be resurrected to heaven as a spirit creature .
Jesus assured his faithful apostles that they would rule with him in heaven .
For them to be thus rewarded , they would first have to die . Afterward , like Christ , they could be resurrected with a spirit body .
Paul wrote that “ Christ has been raised from the dead , the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep in death . ”
Paul went on to indicate that there would be others raised to heavenly life , adding : “ Each one in his own proper order : Christ the firstfruits , afterward those who belong to the Christ during his presence . ” ​ — 1 Cor .
15 : 20 , 23 .
What indication do we have about the timing of the heavenly resurrection ?
That gives us a general indication of the timing of the heavenly resurrection .
It would occur “ during his presence . ”
Jehovah’s Witnesses have long established Scripturally that since 1914 we have been living during Jesus ’ promised “ presence . ” It is still continuing , and the end of this wicked system of things is now very near .
17 , 18 .

What will happen to some anointed ones during Christ’s presence ?
The Bible adds details about the heavenly resurrection : “ We do not want you to be ignorant about those who are sleeping in death . . .

For if we have faith that Jesus died and rose again , so too God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in death . . .
We the living who survive to the presence of the Lord will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep in death ; because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding call , . . . and those who are dead in union with Christ will rise first .
Afterward we the living who are surviving will , together with them , be caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in the air ; and thus we will always be with the Lord . ” ​ — 1 Thess .
4 : 13 - 17 .
The first resurrection would take place sometime after “ the presence ” of Christ began .
Anointed ones who are alive during the great tribulation will be “ caught away in clouds . ”
Those “ caught away ” will not “ fall asleep in death ” in the sense of having a long sleep in death .
They “ will all be changed , in a moment , in the blink of an eye , during the last trumpet . ” ​ — 1 Cor .
15 : 51 , 52 .
What “ better resurrection ” is yet ahead ?
Today , most faithful Christians are not anointed and called to serve in heaven with Christ .
Rather , they await the end of this wicked system of things during “ Jehovah’s day . ”
No one can know the exact timing of that end , but evidence shows that it is close .
Thereafter , a different type of resurrection will take place , a resurrection to life in an earthly paradise .
Those raised will have the prospect of growing to human perfection and never having to die again .
That certainly will be “ a better resurrection ” than that of those in the past when “ women received their dead by resurrection ” only for them to die again sometime later . ​ — Heb .
11 : 35 .
Why can we trust that the coming resurrection will be orderly ?
Speaking of the heavenly resurrection , the Bible says that those who will experience that will be raised “ each one in his own proper order . ”
We can trust that the earthly resurrection will likewise proceed in an orderly manner .
That is an intriguing prospect .
Will those who died recently be raised near the start of Christ’s Thousand Year Reign and be welcomed by loved ones who know them ?
Will faithful men of old with leadership abilities come back early to help organize God’s people in the new world ?

What about people who never served Jehovah ?
When and where will they be raised ?
Many questions could be asked .
But , frankly , is there any real need to ponder those issues now ?

Is it not better just to wait and see ?
We can trust that it will be thrilling to observe personally how Jehovah handles those matters .
What is your hope about the resurrection ?
In the meantime , we should bolster our faith in Jehovah , who through Jesus assured us that the dead in God’s memory will rise .
Proving that Jehovah is capable of resurrecting the dead , Jesus once said that Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob “ are all living to him . ”
Meanwhile , we have ample reason to say , as did Paul : “ I have hope toward God . . . that there is going to be a resurrection . ” ​ — Acts 24 : 15 .
LIFE STORY
As told by Felix Fajardo
“ If you go preaching , don’t come back .
If you come back , I will break your legs . ”
With my father’s threat ringing in my ears , I decided to leave .
That was my first experience in leaving things behind to follow the Master .
I was just 16 years old .
HOW did that situation come about ?
Let me explain .
I was born on July 29 , 1929 , and grew up in a village in the province of Bulacan in the Philippines .
Life there was simple because it was a time of economic depression .

War broke out when I was a youth .
The Japanese army invaded the Philippines .
However , our village was relatively remote , so we were not directly affected by the armed conflict .

We lacked radio , television , and newspapers ; thus , we received news about the war only by word of mouth .
I was the second of eight children , and my grandparents had taken me to live with them when I was eight years old .
Although we were Catholic , Grandfather was open - minded about religion and collected religious literature that his friends gave him .

I remember that he showed me the booklets Protection , Safety , and Uncovered in the Tagalog language , * as well as a Bible .
I enjoyed reading the Bible , especially the four Gospels .
Doing so made me want to follow Jesus ’ example . ​ — John 10 : 27 .
The Japanese occupation ended in 1945 .
About that time , my parents asked me to come back home .
My grandfather urged me to go .
So I went .
Shortly afterward , in December 1945 , a group of Jehovah’s Witnesses from the town of Angat came to preach in our village .
One older Witness came to our house and explained what the Bible says about “ the last days . ”
He invited us to attend a Bible study in a nearby village .
My parents did not go , but I did .
About 20 people were there , and some asked Bible questions .
Because I did not really understand all that they were talking about , I decided to leave .
At that point , however , they started singing a Kingdom song .

The song really impressed me , so I stayed .
After the song and prayer , all were invited to attend a meeting in Angat the following Sunday .
Several of us walked about five miles ( 8 km ) to get to the meeting in the home of the Cruz family .
I was impressed that even the young children who were among the 50 present commented on deep Bible subjects .
After several more meetings , Brother Damian Santos , an elderly pioneer who was an ex - mayor , invited me to stay overnight .
We spent most of that night discussing the Bible .
In those days , many of us responded quickly upon learning basic Bible truths .
After just a few meetings , the brothers asked me and others , “ Do you want to get baptized ? ”
I replied , “ Yes , I do . ”
I knew that I wanted to “ slave for the Master , Christ . ”
We went to a nearby river , and two of us got baptized on February 15 , 1946 .
We realized that as baptized Christians , we needed to preach regularly in imitation of Jesus .
My doing so did not please my father , who said , “ You are too young to preach .

Besides , being dipped in the river does not make you a preacher . ”
I explained that it is God’s will that we preach the good news of God’s Kingdom .
I added , “ I need to fulfill my vow to God . ”
That is when my father made the threat that I related at the outset .
Yes , he was intent on preventing me from preaching .

And that is what led to my first experience in leaving things behind to pursue spiritual goals .
The Cruz family invited me to live with them in Angat .
They also encouraged me and their youngest daughter , Nora , to enroll as pioneers .
Both of us began our pioneer service on November 1 , 1947 .
Nora served in another town , while I continued to support the preaching activity in Angat .
In my third year of pioneering , Earl Stewart , a brother from the branch office , delivered a talk to over 500 people in the public plaza of Angat .
He spoke in English , and afterward I gave a summary of his talk in Tagalog . I had only seven years of education , but our teachers regularly used English .
Another thing that helped me to improve my English was the fact that we had very few Bible publications in Tagalog . So I studied many of them in English .
Thus , I had picked up enough English to interpret that talk and others on later occasions .
On the day that I interpreted for Brother Stewart , he mentioned to the local congregation that the branch office wanted to invite one or two pioneer brothers to come to Bethel .
They were to help out while the missionaries were attending the 1950 Theocracy’s Increase Assembly in New York , U.S.A .
I was one of the brothers invited .
Again I left familiar surroundings behind , this time to help with Bethel work .
I arrived at Bethel on June 19 , 1950 , and started my new assignment .
Bethel was in a large , old house surrounded by big trees on a two - and - a - half acre ( 1 ha ) lot .
About a dozen single brothers were serving there .

In the early morning , I helped in the kitchen .


Then , from about nine o’clock , I worked in the laundry , ironing clothes .
I followed a similar routine in the afternoon .
Even after the missionaries returned from the international assembly , I continued to serve at Bethel .
I wrapped magazines for mailing , processed subscriptions , and served as a receptionist ; I did whatever I was asked to do .
In 1952 , along with six others from the Philippines , I was thrilled to receive an invitation to the 20th class of Gilead School .
Many of the things we saw and experienced in the United States were new and strange to us .

Truly , it was quite different from what I had known back in our small village .
With fellow students at Gilead
For example , we had to learn to use appliances and utensils that were unfamiliar to us .
And , yes , the weather was different for sure !
One morning I stepped outside to a beautiful world of white .
It was the first time I saw snow .
Then I discovered that it was cold ​ — very cold !
However , those adjustments faded into nothing as I enjoyed the wonderful training at Gilead .
The instructors used effective teaching methods .
We learned to do meaningful research and study .
The training at Gilead definitely helped me to improve my spirituality .
After I graduated , I was temporarily assigned as a special pioneer in the Bronx in New York City .
Thus in July 1953 , I could attend the New World Society Assembly , which was held in the same borough of the city .
After the assembly , I returned to an assignment in the Philippines .
The brothers at the branch office said , “ Now you will go out in the circuit work . ”
That would give me a new opportunity to follow in a literal sense the steps of the Master , who traveled to distant towns and cities to help Jehovah’s sheep .

I was assigned to a circuit that covered a huge area of central Luzon , the largest island in the Philippines .
That included the provinces of Bulacan , Nueva Ecija , Tarlac , and Zambales .
To visit some towns , I had to cross the rugged Sierra Madre Mountains .
No public transportation reached those places .
As a result , I had to ask truck drivers if I could sit on top of the logs they were hauling in their big trucks .
Often they let me , but it was not the most comfortable means of transport .
Most of the congregations were relatively small and new .
So the brothers appreciated it when I helped them organize meetings and field service more efficiently .
I was later transferred to a circuit that covered the entire Bicol region .

It was made up mostly of isolated groups where special pioneers were opening up untouched territories .
At one home , the only toilet available was a hole in the ground with two logs across the middle .
When I stepped on the logs , they fell into the hole , and I fell with them .

It took me quite some time to clean myself up and get ready for breakfast !
It was during that assignment that I began to think about Nora , who had started pioneering back in Bulacan .
By this time , she was a special pioneer in Dumaguete City , and I went to visit her .

After that , we corresponded for a while , and in 1956 , we got married .
We spent the first week after our wedding visiting a congregation on Rapu Rapu Island .

There we had to climb mountains and do a lot of walking , but what a joy it was to serve the brothers in remote locations as a married couple !
After almost four years in the traveling work together , we received an invitation to serve at the branch office .
Thus , January 1960 marked the start of a long career at Bethel .
Over the course of time , I have learned much from serving alongside brothers who care for heavy responsibilities , and Nora has had a variety of assignments at Bethel .
Delivering a talk at a convention with a Cebuano interpreter
From my vantage point at Bethel , I have been blessed to witness outstanding spiritual growth in the Philippines .
When I first came to Bethel as a young , single brother , there were about 10,000 publishers in the whole country .
Now there are well over 200,000 publishers in the Philippines , with hundreds of Bethelites serving to support the vital preaching activities .
As the work grew over the years , the Bethel facilities became too small .
Then the Governing Body asked us to look for property on which to build a new , larger facility .

The printery overseer and I went from house to house in the neighborhood of the branch , asking whether anyone wanted to sell his property .
No one did ; one owner even told us : “ Chinese do not sell .
We buy . ”
Interpreting a talk for Brother Albert Schroeder
However , one day a property owner unexpectedly asked whether we would like to buy his land ; he was moving to the United States .
That set off a chain of events that was hard to believe .
Another neighbor decided to sell , and he encouraged the others around him to do the same .
We were even able to buy the property from the man who had said that “ Chinese do not sell . ”
In a short time , the size of the branch property had more than tripled .
I am convinced that Jehovah God wanted that to happen .
Back in 1950 , I was the youngest member of the Bethel family .
Now my wife and I are the oldest members .
I have no regrets about following the Master wherever he has directed me .
True , my parents drove me out of their home , but Jehovah has given me a big family of fellow believers .
I do not have the slightest doubt that Jehovah provides everything we need , no matter what assignment we receive .

Nora and I are very grateful to Jehovah for all his kind provisions , and we encourage others to test Jehovah out . ​ — Mal .
3 : 10 .
Jesus once invited a tax collector named Matthew Levi , saying : “ Be my follower . ”
How did he respond ?
“ Leaving everything behind , he rose up and began to follow [ Jesus ] . ”

I too have had similar opportunities , and I heartily urge others to do the same and experience many blessings .
Happy to continue sharing in the growth in the Philippines
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses but now out of print .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
Côte d’Ivoire ( formerly Ivory Coast ) is a major producer of cocoa beans , which are used to make chocolate .
The beans are spread to dry under the sun .
A pioneer shares with a worker the important contents of the Good News brochure

PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
On this matter , each Christian couple can evaluate the relevant facts and Bible principles .
Then they should make a decision in such a way as to maintain a good conscience before God .
Back when there were just two humans ( and after the Flood , eight ) , Jehovah commanded : “ Be fruitful and become many . ”
The Bible does not say that such a command applies to Christians .
Hence , it is up to each couple to determine whether to use some form of birth control to limit the size of the family or to determine when to have children .
What factors merit their consideration ?
Christians ought to weigh any birth control method in the light of Bible principles .
Thus , Christians reject abortion as a means of birth control .
Voluntary abortion conflicts with what the Bible says about respect for life .
Christians would not choose to terminate a life that in time would normally result in the birth of another human being .
What about the use of an IUD ?

This matter was addressed in The Watchtower of May 15 , 1979 , pages 30 - 31 .
Most IUDs that were then widely available were inert plastic objects inserted in the uterus ( womb ) to prevent pregnancies .
The article noted that it was not fully known how such IUDs functioned .
Many specialists said that inert IUDs caused a reaction in the uterus that interfered with sperm reaching and fertilizing a woman’s eggs .
If fertilization did not occur , a new life did not begin .
Yet , some evidence suggested that an egg occasionally could get fertilized .
The newly fertilized egg might grow in a Fallopian tube ( an ectopic pregnancy ) or might travel into the womb .
In the latter case , the presence of the IUD could interfere with the fertilized egg’s implanting in the lining of the womb and progressing as a normal pregnancy would .
Ending the developing life would be like an abortion .
That article concluded : “ The sincere Christian concerned about the propriety of using an IUD should seriously weigh such information in the light of a Bible - based respect for the sanctity of life . ” ​ — Ps .
36 : 9 .
Have there been significant scientific or medical developments since that article was published in 1979 ?
Two types of IUDs have come to the fore .
One type of IUD that incorporates copper became widely available in the United States by 1988 .
In addition , IUDs that release a hormone came on the market in 2001 .
What is understood about how these two types function ?
Copper : As mentioned , IUDs seem to make it difficult for sperm to survive passing through the uterus to reach an egg .
In addition to that , with copper - releasing IUDs , the copper appears to be toxic to sperm , acting as a spermicide .
* Moreover , copper - containing IUDs are said to alter the lining of the uterus .
Hormone : There are different types of IUDs that contain a hormone similar to what is often found in birth control pills .

These IUDs release the hormone in the uterus .
It appears that such IUDs suppress ovulation in some women .
Of course , if no egg is released , fertilization cannot occur .
Beyond that mechanism , it is held that the hormone in these IUDs thins the lining of the uterus .
* It also thickens the mucus at the cervix , thus creating a barrier to sperm moving from the vagina into the uterus .
These effects are in addition to that produced by inert IUDs .
As noted , both types of IUDs appear to alter the lining of the uterus .

Yet , what if ovulation does occur and an egg is fertilized ?
It might enter the uterus but fail to implant in the less receptive lining .
That would end the pregnancy at an early stage .
However , instances of such “ failed ” implantations are thought to be rare , even as seems to be the case occasionally with oral contraceptive pills .
Hence , no one can say with certainty that IUDs that include copper or a hormone never allow for the fertilization of an egg .
However , scientific evidence suggests that because of a number of mechanisms mentioned above , pregnancy rarely occurs with the use of such IUDs .
A Christian couple considering the use of an IUD might discuss with a qualified medical professional the IUD products available locally as well as possible benefits and risks to the wife .
The couple should not expect or allow a third party , not even a physician , to determine what they will do .
It is a private decision .

They should make their decision as a couple interested in pleasing God and maintaining a clean conscience before him . ​ — Compare 1 Timothy 1 : 18 , 19 ; 2 Timothy 1 : 3 .
A guide from England’s National Health Service reports : “ IUDs with more copper are more than 99 % effective . This means that fewer than one in 100 women who use an IUD will get pregnant in one year .
IUDs with less copper will be less effective . ”

Because they thin the lining of the uterus , hormone - containing IUDs are sometimes prescribed for married or unmarried women to control very heavy menstruation .
“ From infancy you have known the holy writings , which are able to make you wise for salvation . ” ​ — 2 TIM .
3 : 15 .
SONGS : 141 , 134
know the holy writings ?
be persuaded to believe ?
become wise for salvation ?
1 , 2 .
Why might some parents have concerns when their children want to take the steps of dedication and baptism ?
THOUSANDS of Bible students make their dedication to Jehovah and get baptized .
Many are young people who have been raised in the truth and who have chosen the best way of life .
If you are a Christian parent , you no doubt look forward to the day when your son or daughter will get baptized . ​ — Compare 3 John 4 .
Still , you might have concerns . Perhaps you have seen some youths get baptized but later question the wisdom of living by God’s standards .
A number have even left the way of the truth .
Hence , you might worry that your child will start out on the Christian course but then change and lose that original love of the truth .
He or she might become like those in the first - century congregation in Ephesus of whom Jesus said : “ You have left the love you had at first . ”
How can you try to avoid such an outcome and help your child to “ grow to salvation ” ?
In answer , let us consider the example of Timothy .
( a ) Under what circumstances did Timothy become a Christian , and how did he respond to Christian teachings ?
( b ) Paul admonished Timothy about what three aspects of learning ?
It was likely in 47 C.E . , during the apostle Paul’s first visit to Lystra , that Timothy was introduced to Christianity .
Though at the time Timothy was likely a teenager , he must have applied himself well .
Two years later he became Paul’s traveling companion .
Some 16 years after that , Paul wrote to Timothy : “ Continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe , knowing from whom you learned them and that from infancy you have known the holy writings [ the Hebrew Scriptures ] , which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus . ”
Note that Paul mentions ( 1 ) knowing the holy writings , ( 2 ) being persuaded to believe the things learned , and ( 3 ) becoming wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus .
What tools have you found to be effective when you teach your young children ?
( See opening picture . )
As a Christian parent , you want your child to know the holy writings , which today include the Hebrew Scriptures as well as the Christian Greek Scriptures .
Depending on their ability , even very young children can gain a basic education about the people and events of the Bible .
Jehovah’s organization has provided a number of tools that parents can use to help their children .
Can you think of some that are available in your language ?
Remember , knowledge of the Scriptures is the foundation on which a strong relationship with Jehovah is built .
( a ) What does “ persuaded to believe ” mean ?
( b ) How do we know that Timothy was persuaded to believe the good news about Jesus ?
Knowledge of the holy writings is important .
However , more is involved in imparting spiritual education to children than simply teaching them about the people and events of the Bible .
Timothy was also “ persuaded to believe . ”
In the original language , that phrase means “ to be assured of ” or “ to be convinced and certain of the truth of something . ”
Timothy knew the Hebrew Scriptures from infancy .
But at some point he was convinced by compelling evidence that Jesus was the Messiah .
Put another way , his knowledge was reinforced with conviction .
In fact , Timothy’s conviction about the good news was so strong that he became a baptized disciple and joined Paul in the missionary work .
How can you help your children to be persuaded to believe what they learn from God’s Word ?
How can you help build conviction in your children so that they are persuaded to believe , as Timothy was ?
First , be patient . Conviction does not come about overnight ; nor does it pass from you to your offspring simply because you have been persuaded to believe .
Each child needs to use his or her own “ power of reason ” to develop conviction about Bible truth .
( Read Romans 12 : 1 . )
You as a parent play an important role in that process , especially when your child asks questions .
Consider an example .
7 , 8 . ( a ) How does one Christian father show patience in teaching his daughter ?
( b ) How have you found the need for similar patience ?
Thomas , the father of an 11 - year - old girl , relates : “ My daughter might ask , ‛ Could Jehovah have used evolution to develop life on earth ? ’

or , ‛ Why don’t we get involved in the community ​ — with elections , for example — ​ to try to improve things ? ’
Sometimes I have to bite my tongue so as not to give a dogmatic answer .
After all , conviction isn’t the result of one large chunk of truth .
It comes from many small pieces of evidence . ”
As Thomas knows , teaching takes patience . Actually , patience is important for all Christians .
Thomas realizes that there may be a need for many discussions over a period of time .
He needs to reason on the Scriptures so that his daughter develops conviction about what she learns .
“ Especially on important points , ” says Thomas , “ my wife and I want to know if our daughter really believes what she is learning and if it makes sense to her .
If she has questions , that’s good .
Frankly , I would worry if she accepted something without asking questions . ”
How can you inculcate God’s Word in your children ?
With patient teaching from their parents , children will be able gradually to begin to grasp “ the breadth and length and height and depth ” of faith .
We can look for what is appropriate to their age and ability .
As they become convinced of what they learn , they will increasingly be able to defend their beliefs before others , including schoolmates .
For example , can your children explain from the Bible what happens at death ?
Does the Bible’s explanation make sense to them ?
* Yes , inculcating God’s Word in your child will require patience , but it is worth the effort . ​ — Deut .
6 : 6 , 7 .
What should be an important part of your teaching ?
Of course , your example is also important when it comes to building conviction .
Stephanie , the mother of three daughters , says : “ Ever since my children were very young , I have had to ask myself , ‘ Do I talk to my children about why I am convinced of Jehovah’s existence , his love , and the rightness of his ways ?

Can my children clearly see that I really love Jehovah ? ’
I can’t expect my children to be persuaded unless I am . ”
11 , 12 .

What is wisdom , and why can we conclude that it is not measured solely by a person’s age ?
As we have seen , Timothy had ( 1 ) knowledge of the Scriptures and ( 2 ) conviction about his beliefs .
But what did Paul mean by saying that the holy writings could make Timothy “ wise for salvation ” ?
Insight on the Scriptures , Volume 2 , explains that , in the Bible , wisdom includes “ the ability to use knowledge and understanding successfully to solve problems , avoid or avert dangers , attain certain goals , or counsel others in doing so .
It is the opposite of foolishness . ”
The Bible says that “ foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child . ”
Logically , then , wisdom ​ — the opposite of foolishness — ​ would be one evidence of maturity .
Spiritual maturity is not determined primarily by age but by a person’s healthy fear of Jehovah and readiness to obey his commands . ​ — Read Psalm 111 : 10 .
How can a young person demonstrate that he or she is wise for salvation ?
Young ones who are reasonably mature spiritually are not “ tossed about as by waves and carried here and there ” by their desires or by pressure from their peers .
Rather , they are making progress in having “ their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong . ”
They demonstrate that they are progressing toward maturity by making wise decisions ​ — even when their parents or other adults are not watching .
That kind of wisdom is necessary for salvation .
( Read Proverbs 24 : 14 . )
How can you help your children to acquire it ? First of all , make sure that you clearly state your Bible - based values to your children .
By your words and by your example , let them know that the values found in God’s Word are also your values . ​ — Rom .
2 : 21 - 23 .
Why is a parent’s continued effort important ?
( See paragraphs 14 - 18 )
14 , 15 . ( a ) A young person contemplating baptism should consider what weighty issues ?
( b ) How can you help your children ponder blessings that come from obeying God’s laws ?
However , more is involved than simply telling your children what is right and what is wrong .
You would also do well to help them reason on such questions as : ‘ Why does the Bible forbid things that can be appealing to the flesh ?
What convinces me that Bible standards are always for my own good ? ’ ​ — Isa .
48 : 17 , 18 .
A child who expresses interest in getting baptized should be helped to reason on yet another matter ​ — how he or she feels about the responsibilities that come with being a Christian . What are the benefits ? What are the costs ? How do the benefits greatly outweigh the costs ?
Those are issues that one is likely to face after baptism .
Therefore , it is crucial to think these matters through before taking that serious step .
When children are helped to consider deeply the blessings of obedience and the consequences of disobedience , they are more likely to develop a personal conviction .
Which one ? That Bible standards are always in their best interests . ​ — Deut .
30 : 19 , 20 .
What should parents consider if a child who is already baptized begins to waver in faith ?
What , though , if your son or daughter begins to express doubts at some point after baptism ?
For example , a baptized adolescent may seem attracted to the things of the world or may begin to question the wisdom of living by Bible principles .
As a parent , realize that how you handle such questioning on the part of your son or daughter may influence whether your child will choose to draw closer to your faith or he will draw away from it .
Be determined not to declare war with your child over this issue , whether he is still quite young or he is now an adolescent .
Your goal should be to provide loving support and help in a winning way .
17 , 18 .
If a young person has doubts , how can parents provide assistance ?
Of course , a youth who is baptized has made a solemn dedication to Jehovah .
That dedication is a promise to love God and to put his will above everything else .
( Read Mark 12 : 30 . )
Jehovah does not take that promise lightly , and it should not be taken lightly by anyone who has made it .
At an appropriate time and in a kind manner , remind your child of those facts .
Before doing that , however , make good use of material that Jehovah’s organization has provided for parents .
Your doing so may lay the groundwork for stressing both the seriousness and the blessings of being dedicated to Jehovah and of being a baptized Christian .
For example , helpful advice can be found in the appendix entitled “ Questions Parents Ask , ” at the back of the book Questions Young People Ask ​ — Answers That Work , Volume 1 .
It says : “ Don’t hastily conclude that your teen has rejected your faith .
In many cases , there is an underlying issue . ”
It could be peer pressure .
Other possible causes may be loneliness or the feeling that other Christian youths are doing better spiritually .
“ Significantly , ” the appendix continues , “ issues such as these have little to do with the tenets of your faith .
They have more to do with circumstances that make practicing faith a challenge ​ — at least for now . ”
The appendix then provides several suggestions about how a Christian parent might help a youth whose conviction is wavering .
How can parents help their children to become “ wise for salvation ” ?

As a parent , you have the weighty responsibility ​ — and privilege — ​ to bring up your children “ in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah . ”
As we have seen , that requires not only teaching them what the Bible says but also helping them to develop conviction about what they learn .
Yes , they need a conviction that is so strong that it moves them to dedicate themselves to Jehovah and to serve him wholeheartedly .
May Jehovah’s Word , his spirit , and your efforts as a parent help your children to become “ wise for salvation . ”
The “ What Does the Bible Really Teach ? ”
study guides are excellent tools to help both young ones and adults to understand and explain Bible truths .
They can be found on jw.org in many languages .
Look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > BIBLE STUDY TOOLS .
“ Just as you have always obeyed , . . . keep working out your own salvation with fear and trembling . ” ​ — PHIL .
2 : 12 .
SONGS : 133 , 135
Although baptism is a serious step , why should it not be feared or avoided ?
How can you work out your own salvation ?
Why do you treasure your dedication to Jehovah ?
Why is baptism such an important step ?
( See opening picture . )
EACH year thousands of Bible students get baptized . Many are young people ​ — teenagers and preteens .
They may have been raised in the truth . Are you one of them ? If so , you are to be commended .
Baptism is a requirement for Christians , and it is an essential step to gaining salvation . ​ — Matt .
28 : 19 , 20 ; 1 Pet .
3 : 21 .
Why is the step of dedication not to be feared or avoided ?
Although baptism opens the door to many blessings , it also involves responsibility .
In what way ?
On the day of your baptism , you answered yes to the question , “ On the basis of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ , have you repented of your sins and dedicated yourself to Jehovah to do his will ? ”
Your baptism symbolizes your dedication .
It is a solemn promise that you made to Jehovah to love him and to put his will above everything else .
That is a serious commitment .
Should you regret making it ?
No , you definitely should not .
Putting yourself in Jehovah’s hands is never a wrong move .
Consider the alternative !
A person who lives apart from Jehovah is under Satan’s rule .
The Devil has no interest in your salvation .
In fact , he would be happy if you lost out on everlasting life by siding with him in rejecting Jehovah’s sovereignty .
What blessings come from dedicating yourself to Jehovah ?
In contrast to supporting Satan , consider the blessings you have as a dedicated and baptized Christian .
Now that you have given your life to Jehovah , you can say with greater confidence than ever before : “ Jehovah is on my side ; I will not be afraid .
What can man do to me ? ”
You could have no greater privilege in life than being on God’s side and having him approve of you .
4 , 5 . ( a ) In what way is dedication a personal responsibility ?
( b ) What challenges are not unique to young people ?
As a baptized Christian , your relationship with Jehovah is not a ‘ family plan , ’ such as some people have for cellular telephone service .
On the contrary , you are now responsible for your own salvation , even if you still live under your parents ’ roof .
Why is it important to remember that ?
Because you cannot always predict what challenges you will face in the future .
For example , if you were baptized as a preteen , you likely will face new feelings and pressures as you enter and pass through adolescence .
One teenage girl put it this way : “ A child usually won’t resent being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses just because of not having a piece of birthday cake at school .
But in a few years when the urge to have sex becomes stronger , he or she needs to be thoroughly convinced that obeying Jehovah’s laws is always the best choice . ”
Of course , being confronted with new challenges is not unique to young people . Even those who got baptized as adults face many unanticipated tests of faith .
Such tests may have to do with marriage , health issues , or employment .
Really , everyone , regardless of his or her age , will encounter situations that require faithfulness to Jehovah . ​ — Jas .
1 : 12 - 14 .
( a ) In what way is your dedication to Jehovah unconditional ?
( b ) What can you learn from Philippians 4 : 11 - 13 ?
To help you stay faithful in any circumstance , never forget that your promise to Jehovah is unconditional .
That means that you have told the Sovereign of the universe that you will continue to serve him even if your friends or parents stop doing so .
In all situations , you can summon the strength ​ — with Jehovah’s help — ​ to live up to your dedication . ​ — Read Philippians 4 : 11 - 13 .
What does it mean to work out your own salvation “ with fear and trembling ” ?
Jehovah wants you to be his friend .
But maintaining that friendship and working out your own salvation will require effort .
In fact , Philippians 2 : 12 says : “ Keep working out your own salvation with fear and trembling . ”
Those words indicate that you need to consider how you will maintain your friendship with Jehovah and remain faithful to him despite any challenges .
You cannot become overconfident .
Even some of God’s longtime servants have gone astray .
Hence , what steps can you take to work out your own salvation ?
What does personal study include , and why is it important ?
Friendship with Jehovah involves two - way communication ​ — listening and talking .
Personal study of the Bible is the prime way we listen to Jehovah .
That includes taking in knowledge by reading and meditating on God’s Word and Bible - based publications .
As you do that , remember that study of the Bible is not a mere academic exercise .

It should not be as if you were memorizing facts just to pass a school exam .
Fruitful study is more like an expedition on which you can explore and discover new aspects of Jehovah’s personality .
This will help you to draw close to God , and then he will draw close to you . ​ — Jas .
4 : 8 .
How well are you communicating with Jehovah ?
( See paragraphs 8 - 11 )
What tools have helped you in your personal study ?
Jehovah’s organization has provided a number of tools to help you put together an effective study program .
For example , “ Bible Study Activities ” found on the “ Teenagers ” section of jw.org can help you to learn practical lessons from Bible events .
Also on jw.org , the study guides “ What Does the Bible Really Teach ? ”
can help you to build your conviction about your beliefs .
Those study guides can help you to learn how to explain your beliefs to others .
Other ideas for study can be found in the article “ Young People Ask . . .
How Can I Make Bible Reading Enjoyable ? ”
in the April 2009 issue of Awake !

Study and meditation play an important role in working out your own salvation . ​ — Read Psalm 119 : 105 .
Why is prayer vital for a baptized Christian ?
While personal study is one way we listen to Jehovah , prayer is a way in which we speak to him .
A Christian should not view prayer as a meaningless ritual ; nor is it a ‘ good luck charm ’ to increase the chances of success at some endeavor .
Rather , prayer is real communication with our Creator .
Jehovah wants to hear from you .
( Read Philippians 4 : 6 . )
When you experience any kind of anxiety , the Bible’s wise advice is to “ throw your burden on Jehovah . ”
Do you really believe that ?
There are millions of brothers and sisters who can assure you that it has helped them .
It can help you too ! Why should you always give thanks to Jehovah ?
Prayer offers you the opportunity to do more than simply ask Jehovah for help .
The Bible says : “ Show yourselves thankful . ”
Sometimes we can become so consumed by our problems that we overlook the many blessings we have .
Why not determine that each day you will think of at least three things for which you can be thankful ?
Then thank Jehovah in prayer for those blessings .
A teenager named Abigail , who got baptized at age 12 , says : “ I feel that Jehovah deserves our thanks more than anyone else in the universe .
We should thank him at every opportunity for the gifts he has given us .
I once heard an excellent reminder : If we woke up tomorrow with only the things we thanked Jehovah for today , what would we end up with ? ”
*
12 , 13 .
Why is it important to think of how you personally have tasted Jehovah’s goodness ?
Ancient King David , who had been delivered from many grievous trials , expressed these words in song : “ Taste and see that Jehovah is good ; happy is the man who takes refuge in him . ”
That verse highlights the value of personal experience .
When you read the Bible and our publications and when you attend Christian meetings , you hear encouraging experiences of how God has helped others to stay faithful .
But as you grow spiritually , you need to see Jehovah’s hand in your own life .
How have you personally tasted Jehovah’s goodness ?
There is one way that all Christians have tasted Jehovah’s goodness .
It is by being invited to draw close to God and his Son .

Jesus said : “ No man can come to me unless the Father , who sent me , draws him . ”
Do you feel that those words apply to you ?
A youth might reason , ‘ Jehovah drew my parents , and I merely followed . ’
But when you dedicated yourself to Jehovah and got baptized , you showed that you had come into a privileged relationship with him .
Now you are truly known by him .
The Bible assures us : “ If anyone loves God , this one is known by him . ”
Try always to treasure , to appreciate , your place in Jehovah’s organization .
14 , 15 .
How can the ministry help you to strengthen your faith ?
Another way you can taste Jehovah’s goodness is by experiencing his support as you share your faith with others .
You can do that in the ministry as well as at school . Some find it difficult to preach to their peers at school .
You likely can understand why . You have no idea how they will react .
It can be especially challenging when speaking to a large group rather than to a classmate one - on - one .
What can help you ?
First , think about why you are convinced of your beliefs .
Are the study guides found on jw.org available in your language ?
If you are not sure , take the time to look for them . They are designed to help you reflect on what you believe , why you believe it , and how you can explain your beliefs to others .
When your conviction is strong and you are well - prepared , you will feel impelled to give a witness for Jehovah’s name . ​ — Jer .
20 : 8 , 9 .
What might help you overcome hesitancy to speak up about your beliefs ?
Even with preparation , however , you may be hesitant to speak up about your beliefs .
An 18 - year - old sister , baptized when she was 13 , admits , “ I know what I believe , but sometimes I have trouble putting my thoughts into words . ”
How does she deal with this obstacle ?
“ I just try to be casual , ” she says .
“ My classmates talk freely about the things that they do .
I should feel free to do the same .
So I’ll mention something in passing , such as , ‘ I was teaching the Bible the other day , and . . . ’
Then I continue with the point of my story .
Although the immediate point is not in itself about the Bible , often others are curious about what I do when teaching the Bible .
Sometimes they ask questions about it .
The more I use this approach , the easier it gets .
And afterward , I always feel great ! ”
How can your view of your faith help you to speak to others ?
As you show respect for others and take a personal interest in them , it is more likely that they will respond in kind .
“ I had always been afraid that if I worked the Bible into a conversation , people would view me as a fanatic . ”
That is a comment made by Olivia , who is 17 and who got baptized as a preteen .
Then she started to think differently .
Rather than give too much thought to her fears , Olivia reasoned : “ A lot of young people don’t know anything about Jehovah’s Witnesses .
We are the only Witnesses they are exposed to .
So the way we act can determine how they will respond .
What if we are shy or timid or have a hard time speaking up about our faith , or what if we cringe when we do speak up ?
Then they may look at us as if we aren’t proud of who we are .
They may even respond unkindly because of our lack of confidence .
However , if we talk with ease and assurance about what we believe , making it a normal part of conversation , it’s more likely that they will respect us . ”
What is involved in your working out your own salvation ?
As we have seen , working out your own salvation is a serious responsibility .
Some of the things involved are reading God’s Word and meditating on it , praying to Jehovah , and thinking of ways that Jehovah has blessed you as an individual .
Applying yourself in those aspects will boost your confidence in your privilege of having a friendship with Jehovah .
That , in turn , will move you to speak up about your beliefs . ​ — Read Psalm 73 : 28 .
Why is the effort you put into your salvation worthwhile ?
Jesus said : “ If anyone wants to come after me , let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and keep following me . ”
Clearly , discipleship ​ — including dedication and baptism — ​ is an obligation for you as a Christian .
Yet , it opens the door to countless blessings now and to everlasting life in God’s new world .
You have every reason , then , to keep working out your own salvation !
For more suggestions , see “ Young People Ask ​ — Why Should I Pray ? ”
and its accompanying worksheet on jw.org .
Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower ?
Well , see if you can answer the following questions :
In helping their children spiritually , why should immigrant parents evaluate the matter of language ?
The children will likely learn the local language at school and in their environment .
It can be useful for a child to know more than one language .
Parents should consider where the youths will best grasp the truth and progress spiritually , whether in association with a congregation that uses the local language or with one that uses the immigrant’s language .
Christian parents put their children’s spiritual well - being ahead of personal preferences . ​ — w17.05 , pp .
9 - 11 .
When Jesus asked Peter : “ Do you love me more than these ? ”
to what did “ these ” refer ?
( John 21 : 15 )
It seems that Jesus was referring to the fish lying nearby and / ​ or the fishing business . After Jesus ’ death , Peter returned to his former occupation ​ — fishing .
Christians should weigh the place that secular work has in their heart . ​ — w17.05 , pp .
22 - 23 .
Why did Abraham ask his wife to say that she was his sister ?
( Gen .
12 : 10 - 13 )
In fact , Sarah was Abraham’s half sister .
If Sarah had said that she was his wife , Abraham might have been killed and thus could not have produced the offspring whom God had promised him . ​ — wp17.3 , pp .
14 - 15 .
What technique did Elias Hutter introduce to help those wanting to learn Hebrew ?
He wanted to enable students to distinguish between the root of Hebrew words in the Bible and any associated prefixes or suffixes . To that end , he printed the root in solid letters but the prefixes or suffixes in outline form .
A similar approach is found in footnotes in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures ​ — With References . ​ — wp17.4 , pp .
11 - 12 .
What factors should affect a Christian’s view of keeping a firearm for protection against other humans ?
Some are : God views life as sacred .
Jesus did not urge his followers to get swords for protection .
We are to beat our swords into plowshares .
Life is more valuable than material things .
We respect the conscience of others , and we want to be exemplary . ​ — w17.07 , pp .
31 - 32 .
Why do Matthew’s and Luke’s accounts differ as to Jesus ’ early life ?
Matthew focuses on Joseph , such as his reaction to Mary’s pregnancy and the divine messages to flee to Egypt and later return .
Luke is more focused on Mary ; for example , her visit to Elizabeth and her reaction when the boy Jesus remained at the temple . ​ — w17.08 , p .

32 .
What are some things the Bible has had to endure ?
The meaning of words and expressions used in the Bible have changed over time .
Political developments have affected the common language .
There has been opposition to the translation of the Bible into common languages . ​ — w17.09 , pp .
19 - 21 .
Do we have a guardian angel ?
No .
Jesus spoke of his disciples ’ angels looking upon the face of God .
He was saying that angels are interested in his disciples , not that angels are miraculously protecting each one of them . ​ — wp17.5 , p .
5 .

What is the highest form of love ?
When it is based on right principles , a·gaʹpe is the highest form of love .
It can include affection and warmth .

But it reflects high principles , such as unselfish actions for the good of others . ​ — w17.10 , p .
7 .
Indicating the issue in which each article appears
Another Bit of Evidence ( Tattenai existed ) , No .
3 Elias Hutter and His Hebrew Bibles , No .
4 Get More From Reading the Bible , No .
1 Misunderstandings About , No . 1 Why So Many ? No .
6 For Me , God Did Not Exist ( A . Golec ) , No . 5 I Did Not Want to Die !
( Y . Quarrie ) , No . 1
I Loved Baseball More Than Anything ! ( S . Hamilton ) , No .
3 Benefits of Giving , No . 2
Is Celibacy a Requirement for Ministers ? No . 2
Is Christmas for Christians ? No .
6 Love ​ — A Precious Quality , Aug .
Proper View of Mistakes , No .
6 Resolve Conflicts and Promote Peace , June
When Friendship Is in Danger , Mar .
Winning the Battle for Your Mind , July
Accept God’s Greatest Gift ? No . 2
Cause of Suffering ?
No .
1 Adjusting to Your New Congregation , Nov .
“ Generous Person Will Be Blessed ” ( contributions ) , Nov . Joy of Leading a Simple Life , May
“ No Road Too Rough or Too Long ” ( Australia ) , Feb .
Offered Selves in Turkey , July
Offered Selves Willingly ( single sisters ) , Jan .
One Act of Christian Kindness , Oct . “ When Are We Going to Have Another Assembly ? ” ( Mexico ) , Aug .
‘ With More Zeal and Love Than Ever ’ ( 1922 convention ) , May
Illustration About “ Little Dogs ” Insulting ? No . 5 What Did Jesus Really Look Like ? No . 6
Being Deaf Has Not Held Me Back From Teaching Others ( W .
Markin ) , May
Blessings Come From Doing What Jehovah Asks ( O . Matthews ) , Oct .
Determined to Be a Soldier of Christ ( D .
Psarras ) , Apr . Endurance Under Trial Results in Blessings ( P .
Sivulsky ) , Aug .
I Have Been Blessed to Work With Spiritual Men ( D . Sinclair ) , Sept .
I Have Benefited From Walking With Wise Ones ( W .
Samuelson ) , Mar .
Leaving Things Behind to Follow the Master ( F . Fajardo ) , Dec .
We Experienced God’s Undeserved Kindness in Many Ways ( D .
Guest ) , Feb .
Angels Real ?
No .
5
Anxiety , No .
4 Best Gift of All , No .
6 Bible Name on Ancient Jar , Mar .
“ Blessed Be Your Good Sense ! ” ( Abigail ) , June
Escape From Slavery , No . 2
Ever Be Peace on Earth ?
No .
5 Ever Be True Justice on Earth ?
No .
3 Four Horsemen , No .
3 God Called Her “ Princess ” ( Sarah ) , No . 5
Hebrew’s Smallest Letter , No .
4 “ He Had Pleased God Well ” ( Enoch ) , No . 1
How Gaius Helped His Brothers , May
How Was Fire Transported in Ancient Times ?
Jan .
Joseph of Arimathea , Oct .
Living in “ the Last Days ” ?
No .
2 Look Beyond Outward Appearances , June
Paradise on Earth ​ — Fantasy or Reality ? No .
4 Paul’s Counsel to Delay Voyage , No .
5 Suffering , No . 1
Were Merchants Who Sold Animals in Temple “ Robbers ” ? June
“ What a Beautiful Woman You Are ” ( Sarah ) , No . 3
What Is Armageddon ?
No .
6 What Jewish Practice Caused Jesus to Condemn the Swearing of Oaths ?
Oct .
What the Bible Says About Life and Death , No . 4
When a Loved One Is Terminally Ill , No .
4 Jehovah “ will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear ” , Feb .
Keep a firearm for protection from humans ?
July Line leading to Messiah tied to right of firstborn ?
Dec . Married Christians view IUD as compatible with the Scriptures ?
Dec .
Why do Matthew’s and Luke’s accounts about Jesus ’ early life differ ?
Aug .
Are You Taking Refuge in Jehovah ?
Nov .
Are You Willing to Wait Patiently ?
Aug .
“ Be Courageous . . . and Go to Work , ” Sept .
Chariots and a Crown Safeguard You , Oct . Cultivate Self - Control , Sept .
Do Not Let Your Love Grow Cold , May
“ Do You Love Me More Than These ? ”
May Do You Share Jehovah’s Sense of Justice ? Apr .
Exercise Faith ​ — Decide Wisely ! Mar .
Give Honor to Whom It Is Due , Mar .
Helping “ Foreign Residents ” to “ Serve Jehovah With Rejoicing , ” May
Helping the Children of “ Foreign Residents , ” May
How We Put On and Keep On the New Personality , Aug .
How We Strip Off and Keep Off the Old Personality , Aug .
“ I Have Hope Toward God , ” Dec .
“ I Know He Will Rise , ” Dec .
Imitate Jehovah’s Compassion , Sept .
Imitate Jehovah’s Justice and Mercy , Nov .
Jehovah Leads His People , Feb .
Jehovah Provides Comfort in All Our Trials , June
Jehovah’s Purpose Will Be Fulfilled ! Feb .
Keep Your Eyes on the Big Issue , June
Let Nothing Deprive You of the Prize , Nov .
“ Love . . . in Deed and Truth , ” Oct .
Make a Joyful Sound !
Nov .
“ May He . . .
Give Success to All Your Plans , ” July
May Your Volunteer Spirit Bring Praise to Jehovah !
Apr . Parents ​ — Help Your Children Become “ Wise for Salvation , ” Dec .
“ Praise Jah ! ” ​ — Why ?
July Reject Worldly Thinking , Nov .
Seeking Riches That Are True , July
Serve Jehovah With a Complete Heart !
Mar . Set Your Heart on Spiritual Treasures , June
“ The Judge of All the Earth ” Always Does What Is Right , Apr .
“ The Peace of God . . . Surpasses All Understanding , ” Aug .
The Ransom ​ — A “ Perfect Present ” From the Father , Feb .
“ These Things Entrust to Faithful Men , ” Jan .
The Truth Brings , “ Not Peace , But a Sword , ” Oct .
“ The Word of God . . . Exerts Power , ” Sept . “ The Word of Our God Endures Forever , ” Sept .
Treasure Your Gift of Free Will , Jan .
“ Trust in Jehovah and Do What Is Good , ” Jan .
Uphold Jehovah’s Sovereignty !
June Visions of Zechariah ​ — How They Affect You , Oct .
“ Weep With Those Who Weep , ” July
What Will Go When God’s Kingdom Comes ?
Apr .
“ What You Vow , Pay , ” Apr . Who Is Leading God’s People Today ? Feb .
Why Modesty Still Matters , Jan .
Will You Apply Your Heart to the Things Written ?
Mar .
You Can Remain Modest Under Test , Jan .
Young Ones ​ — “ Keep Working Out Your Own Salvation , ” Dec .
3 They Offered Themselves Willingly ​ — In Madagascar
7 “ He Gives Power to the Tired One ”
When we feel overwhelmed by the pressures of life , what can we do ?
This article discusses our yeartext for 2018 and shows why we need to give Jehovah the opportunity to strengthen us and how he will do so .
12 Pleasant Unity and the Memorial
The annual observance of the Memorial of Christ’s death will be held on Saturday , March 31 , 2018 .
How can we prepare now for this occasion , how will we benefit from attending it , and how does that annual event contribute to the unity of God’s people everywhere ?
Find the answers in this article .
17 Why Give to the One Who Has Everything ?
All that we have comes from Jehovah . He still expects us , however , to use our finances to support the work of his organization today .
This article will consider why and how we benefit from honoring Jehovah with our valuable things .
22 What Kind of Love Brings True Happiness ?
27 See the Difference in People

The first of these articles discusses how true happiness comes from loving God and not from the counterfeit types of love so evident in “ the last days . ”

The second article describes how traits that characterize people of the last days stand in sharp contrast with the qualities found among God’s people .
32 Did You Know ?
“ WHEN I listened to the experiences of my friends who served in areas where there was a great need for pioneers , I longed to taste that joy too , ” says Sylviana , a pioneer in her mid - 20 ’ s .
“ But , ” she adds , “ I feared that being a need - greater was beyond my abilities . ”
Can you relate to the feelings expressed by Sylviana ?
Do you too long to serve in a territory where more Kingdom workers are needed , but you wonder whether you will ever reach that goal ?

If that is the case , take heart !
With Jehovah’s help , thousands of brothers and sisters have succeeded in overcoming obstacles that hindered them from expanding their ministry .
To find out how Jehovah opened the way for some of them , we will visit Madagascar , the fourth largest island on earth .

Over the past ten years , more than 70 zealous publishers and pioneers from 11 countries * have come to serve in this fruitful field in Africa , where many people respect the Bible .
Also , numerous local publishers have been willing to move so as to help in spreading the Kingdom message throughout this vast island territory .

Let us get acquainted with some of them .
Perrine and Louis
Louis and Perrine , a couple in their 30 ’ s , moved from France to Madagascar .

For years , they had been thinking about expanding their ministry by moving abroad , but Perrine hesitated to move .
She explains : “ I feared going into the unknown .
I was anxious about leaving behind our family , congregation , apartment , all the familiar places , and our routine .
Really , my own worries were the greatest obstacle I had to overcome . ”
In 2012 , Perrine mustered up the courage , and she and Louis moved .
How does she feel about their decision ?
“ Looking back , I can say that it has been a faith - strengthening experience to see Jehovah’s hand at work in our lives . ”

Adds Louis , “ Imagine , at our first Memorial in Madagascar , ten of our Bible students attended ! ”
What gave the couple the strength to stay in their assignment when problems arose ?
They supplicated Jehovah in prayer to give them the power needed to endure .
Louis relates : “ We experienced that Jehovah answered our prayers and gave us ‘ the peace of God . ’
We were able to focus on the joys that our service was bringing us .
Also , friends from home sent us e - mails and letters to encourage us not to give up . ” ​ — Phil . 4 : 6 , 7 ; 2 Cor .
4 : 7 . Jehovah richly rewarded the endurance shown by Louis and Perrine .
“ In October 2014 , we attended the Bible School for Christian Couples * in France , ” says Louis .
“ Attending that school was an unforgettable gift from Jehovah . ”
Upon graduating , the couple were delighted to be reassigned to Madagascar .
Nadine and Didier
When Didier and Nadine , a couple from France , moved to Madagascar in 2010 , they were middle - aged .
Didier relates : “ We pioneered when we were younger , and then we raised three children .
When they reached adulthood , we considered the possibility of serving abroad . ”
Nadine admits : “ The thought of being separated from the children made me hesitate , but they told us : ‘ If you move abroad to serve as need - greaters , we will be proud of you ! ’
Their words encouraged us to make the move .
Although we now live far away from our children , we are glad that we are able to have frequent conversations with them . ”
For Didier and Nadine , learning the Malagasy language was a challenge .
“ We’re not 20 - year - olds anymore , ” says Nadine with a smile .
How did they succeed ?
First , they joined a French - speaking congregation .
Later , when they felt ready to tackle the local language , they moved to a Malagasy - speaking congregation .
Says Nadine : “ Many people we meet in the preaching work love to study the Bible .
They often thank us for visiting them .
At first , I thought I was dreaming .
I love pioneering in this territory .
When I get up in the morning , I say to myself , ‘ It’s great ​ — I’m going preaching today ! ’ ”
Didier smiles as he recalls the time when he began to learn Malagasy .
“ I was conducting a congregation meeting but did not understand any of the answers given by the brothers and sisters .
All I could say was , ‘ Thank you . ’
After I thanked one sister for her answer , those seated behind her started gesturing to me to alert me that the answer was not correct .
I quickly called on a brother who gave the right answer ​ — at least , I hope he did . ”
At a convention in 2005 , Thierry and his wife , Nadia , watched the drama “ Pursue Goals That Honor God . ”

That Bible drama about Timothy touched their hearts and deepened their desire to serve where the need for Kingdom workers was greater .
Says Thierry : “ At the conclusion of that drama , while we were applauding , I leaned over to my wife and asked , ‘ Where are we going ? ’
My wife said that she was thinking about the same thing . ”
Soon thereafter , they began to take steps to reach their goal .
Nadia relates , “ Gradually , we downsized our belongings until all we had left fitted into four suitcases ! ”
Far left : Nadia and Marie - Madeleine ; Far right : Thierry
They arrived in Madagascar in 2006 and enjoyed their ministry from the start .
Says Nadia , “ The people we meet give us so much joy . ”
Six years later , though , the couple faced a challenge .
Nadia’s mother , Marie - Madeleine , who lived in France , fell and broke her arm and injured her head .
After the couple had consulted Marie - Madeleine’s doctor , they asked their mother to come and live with them in Madagascar .
Though 80 years of age at the time , she gladly accepted the invitation .
How does she feel about living abroad ?
She says : “ Sometimes it is challenging to adapt , but despite my limited abilities , I feel so useful in the congregation .

And what makes me really happy is that this living arrangement allows my children to continue their fruitful ministry here . ”
Riana giving a talk in the Tandroy language
Riana is a brother in his early 20 ’ s .
He grew up in Alaotra Mangoro , a fertile region in eastern Madagascar .
He did well in school and wanted to pursue higher education .
Yet , after studying the Bible , he changed his mind .
He relates : “ I strove to finish my secondary schooling earlier and promised Jehovah , ‘ If I pass my final exam , I will start pioneering . ’ ”
After graduating , Riana kept his promise .
He moved in with a pioneer brother , got a part - time job , and began to pioneer .
He says , “ It was the best decision I ever made . ”
However , Riana’s relatives did not understand why he did not pursue a secular career .
He relates : “ My father , uncle , and grandaunt all encouraged me to pursue higher education . But I did not want to stop pioneering for anything . ”
Before long , Riana wanted to serve where the need for workers was greater .
What contributed to that desire ?
He relates : “ Thieves broke into our living quarters and stole many of my belongings .
That burglary made me reflect on Jesus ’ words about storing up ‘ treasures in heaven . ’
I decided to work harder at acquiring spiritual riches . ”
He moved to the southernmost part of the country ​ — a drought - stricken region 800 miles ( 1,300 km ) from where he had been living .
That region is home to the Antandroy people .
Why did he go there ?
A month before the burglary took place , Riana had started a Bible study with two Antandroy men .
He learned some expressions in their language and thought about the many Antandroy people who had not yet been reached with the Kingdom message .
He says , “ I prayed to Jehovah to help me move to the Tandroy - speaking region . ”
Riana moved , and right away he faced an obstacle .
He could not get a job .
One man told him : “ Why did you come here ?
To find jobs , people from this place go to where you came from ! ”
After two weeks , Riana left the area almost penniless to attend a regional convention , wondering what to do .
On the last day of the convention , a brother slipped something into Riana’s coat pocket .
It was a sum of money large enough for him to travel back to the Antandroy area and to start a small business selling yogurt .
Says Riana : “ I felt Jehovah’s helping hand just in time .
I could continue to help those who had not had a chance to learn about Jehovah ! ”
There was also much work to do in the congregation .
Riana adds : “ I was assigned to give a public talk every other week .

Jehovah was training me through his organization . ”
Today , Riana is still sharing the Kingdom message with the many Tandroy - speaking people who want to learn about Jehovah .
Jehovah assures us that “ anyone who seeks a blessing for himself in the earth will be blessed by the God of truth . ”
When we work hard to overcome obstacles to expand our ministry , we do experience Jehovah’s blessing .
Consider Sylviana , mentioned in the introduction to this article .
Remember , she feared that being a need - greater would be beyond her abilities .
Why did she think so ?
She explains : “ My left leg is about three - and - a - half inches ( 9 cm ) shorter than my right leg .
So I walk with a limp and tire out quickly . ” Sylviana ( left ) and Sylvie Ann ( right ) with Doratine on the day of her baptism
In 2014 , Sylviana nevertheless teamed up with Sylvie Ann , a young pioneer sister in her congregation , and they moved to a small village 53 miles ( 85 km ) from their hometown .

Despite the obstacles , Sylviana’s dream had come true ​ — and what a fine blessing she received !
“ After just one year serving in my new assignment , ” she relates , “ Doratine , a young mother with whom I studied the Bible , got baptized at our circuit assembly . ”
As the expressions of faith from these need - greaters show , when we strive to overcome an obstacle to expand our ministry , we experience in a very personal way the truthfulness of Jehovah’s promise to his servants : “ I will fortify you , yes , I will help you . ”
As a result , our relationship with Jehovah deepens .
In addition , offering ourselves willingly ​ — in the area where we live or in a foreign country — ​ prepares us for the theocratic activities that are awaiting us in the new world .
As Didier , mentioned before , puts it , “ serving where the need is greater is good training for the future ! ”
May many more willing workers start that training soon !
The need - greaters came from Canada , Czech Republic , France , Germany , Guadeloupe , Luxembourg , New Caledonia , Sweden , Switzerland , the United Kingdom , and the United States .
Now replaced by the School for Kingdom Evangelizers .
Full - time ministers serving abroad who meet the requirements may apply to attend this school in their country of origin or in another country where the school is held in their mother tongue . Keep in touch with need - greaters who moved away from your congregation .
Inquire about their ministry and their well - being . ​ — Prov .
17 : 17 ; 25 : 25 .
Could you help them find a job as a remote worker to enable them to stay in their assignment ?
Or could you offer them a job when they return temporarily to their country of origin ? ​ — Acts 18 : 1 - 3 .
Could you provide them with accommodations when they return to their country of origin to work or to visit ? ​ — 3 John 5 - 8 .
If need - greaters serve in your congregation , let them know how much you appreciate them .
Commend them for their efforts to learn your language .
Inquire about their family .
Include them in your social activities . Help them to feel at home . ​ — Matt .
19 : 29 .
Our yeartext for 2018 : “ Those hoping in Jehovah will regain power . ” ​ — ISA . 40 : 31 .
SONGS : 3 , 47
Isaiah 40 : 26
Matthew 11 : 28 - 30
2 Corinthians 12 : 9 , 10
What pressures must we deal with , but what reason does Jehovah have to be pleased with his faithful servants ?
( See opening pictures . )

AS YOU know , life in this system of things is by no means trouble - free .
Many of you dear brothers and sisters are coping with serious illness .
Others , although well along in years themselves , are caring for elderly relatives .
Still others are struggling to provide , not luxury items , but just the basic necessities for their families .
And we know that many are dealing with , not one , but several of such problems all at once !
This requires a tremendous expenditure of time and emotional energy ​ — to say nothing of the financial burden .
Nevertheless , your confidence in God’s promises is absolute ; your faith in a better future , unwavering .
How pleased Jehovah must be !
What encouragement can we draw from Isaiah 40 : 29 , but what serious mistake could we make ?
Do you sometimes feel , though , that the pressures of life are driving you to the limit ?
If you do , you are not alone .
The Bible reveals that faithful servants in the past often felt that they could not go on .
However , rather than give up , they looked to Jehovah for strength .
They were not disappointed , for our God “ gives power to the tired one . ”
Sadly , some of God’s people in our day have concluded that the best way to cope with the pressures of life is to ‘ take a break from the truth , ’ as they say , as if our Christian activities were a burden rather than a blessing .
So they stop reading God’s Word , attending congregation meetings , and engaging in the field ministry ​ — just as Satan hopes they will do .


( a ) How can we frustrate Satan’s goal to weaken us ?
( b ) What will we discuss in this article ?
The Devil well knows that our being fully engaged in Christian activities can strengthen us , and he does not want us to be strong .
When you feel physically and emotionally drained , then , do not cut yourself off from Jehovah .
Draw ever closer to him , for “ he will make you firm , he will make you strong . ”
In this article , we will consider two situations that could cause us to slow down in our service to God and we will discuss how applying Bible principles can help us to cope .
But first , let us focus on Jehovah’s ability to strengthen us , as shown at Isaiah 40 : 26 - 31 .
What lesson can we learn from Isaiah 40 : 26 ?
Read Isaiah 40 : 26 .
No one has been able to count all the stars in the universe .
Scientists believe that our Milky Way galaxy alone may contain up to 400 billion stars .
Yet , Jehovah gives a name or a designation to each star .
The lesson for us ?
If Jehovah takes a personal interest in his inanimate creation , imagine how he feels about you who serve him , not because you have been programmed to do so , but because you love him !

Our dear Father knows you through and through .
“ Even the hairs of your head are all numbered ” by him .
And the psalmist assures us : “ Jehovah is aware of what the blameless go through . ”
Yes , he takes notice of the trials you face , and he can give you the strength to endure each one of them .
How can we be sure that Jehovah is able to strengthen us ?
Read Isaiah 40 : 28 .
Jehovah is the Source of dynamic energy .
Consider , for example , the amount of energy that he supplies just to our sun .
Science writer David Bodanis observed : “ The mass our Sun is exploding into energy each second is equivalent to [ billions of atomic ] bombs . ”
Another researcher calculated that the sun “ currently radiates . . . sufficient energy in one second to meet mankind’s needs for 200,000 years ” !
Can anyone doubt that the One who “ fuels ” the sun can give us the strength we need to cope with any problem ?
In what sense is Jesus ’ yoke kindly , and how should knowing that affect us ?
Read Isaiah 40 : 29 .
Serving Jehovah brings much joy .
Jesus said to his disciples : “ Take my yoke upon you . ”
And he added : “ You will find refreshment for yourselves .
For my yoke is kindly , and my load is light . ”
How true that statement is !
At times , we may feel exhausted when we leave home to attend a congregation meeting or to engage in the field ministry .
But how do we feel when we return ?
Refreshed ​ — and better prepared to deal with life’s trials .
Jesus ’ yoke is kindly indeed !
Relate an experience that illustrates the truthfulness of Matthew 11 : 28 - 30 .
A sister whom we will call Kayla has had to battle with chronic fatigue syndrome , depression , and migraine headaches .
Understandably , she has sometimes found it difficult to attend congregation meetings .
However , after she made the effort to attend a public meeting , she wrote : “ The talk was about discouragement .
The information was presented in such an empathetic and concerned way that I was moved to tears .
I was reminded that the meetings are where I need to be . ”
How happy she was that she made the effort to attend !
8 , 9 .
What did the apostle Paul mean when he wrote : “ When I am weak , then I am powerful ” ?
Read Isaiah 40 : 30 .
No matter how qualified we may be , we are limited in what we can accomplish in our own strength .
That is a lesson we all must learn .
Although he was a capable man , the apostle Paul had limitations that prevented him from doing everything he wanted to do .
When he expressed his concerns to God , he was told : “ My power is being made perfect in weakness . ”
Paul got the point . He concluded : “ When I am weak , then I am powerful . ”
What did he mean by that ?
Paul realized that there was only so much he could do without help from a higher source .
God’s holy spirit could supply the power that Paul lacked .
Not only that , but God’s spirit could empower Paul to perform tasks that he would never have been able to complete in his own power .
The same is true of us .
If the strength we have comes from Jehovah , we will be strong indeed !
How did Jehovah help David to cope with the challenges he faced ?
The psalmist David often experienced the power of God’s holy spirit .
He sang : “ With your help I can charge against a marauder band ; by God’s power I can scale a wall . ”
There are some walls ​ — some problems — ​ that we cannot “ scale ” in our own strength ; we need a boost from Jehovah .
Describe the role of holy spirit in helping us to cope with our problems .
Read Isaiah 40 : 31 .
The eagle does not soar and glide long distances solely in its own power .
A draft of warm air gives it the lift it needs , enabling the eagle to conserve energy .

So when you are faced with a daunting task , remember the eagle .
Beg Jehovah to give you a “ lift ” by means of “ the helper , the holy spirit . ”
Happily , we can have access to it whenever we need it ​ — 24 hours a day .
And we may most keenly feel the need for divine help when we have a disagreement with a member of the congregation .
But why do such differences arise ?
12 , 13 . ( a ) Why do differences between Christians occur ?
( b ) What does the account of Joseph teach us about Jehovah ?
Differences between individuals occur because we are all imperfect .
Accordingly , there will be times when we will be irritated by the words or actions of fellow believers ​ — or when they will be annoyed by ours .
This can be a serious test .

As with other tests , Jehovah allows us to prove our integrity by learning to work unitedly with dedicated men and women whom he loves despite their imperfections .
Jehovah did not abandon Joseph ; neither will he abandon you ( See paragraph 13 )
That Jehovah does not prevent his servants from being tested is illustrated by the account of Joseph .
As a young man , Joseph was sold into slavery by his jealous half brothers and taken to Egypt .
Jehovah saw what was happening and no doubt was grieved to observe the way his friend , righteous Joseph , was being treated .
Still , He did not intervene .
Later , when Joseph was accused of trying to rape Potiphar’s wife and was thrown into prison , Jehovah still did not step in .
But did God ever abandon Joseph ?
On the contrary : “ Jehovah made whatever [ Joseph ] did successful . ” ​ — Gen .
39 : 21 - 23 .
What spiritual and physical benefits can we derive by ‘ letting go ’ of anger ?
Here is another example . Few people have been treated as badly as David was .
Still , that friend of God did not allow resentment to gnaw away at him .
Rather , he wrote : “ Let go of anger and abandon rage ; do not become upset and turn to doing evil . ”
The most important reason to “ let go ” of anger is to imitate Jehovah , who “ has not dealt with us according to our sins . ”
But there are also practical benefits to ‘ letting go ’ of anger .
Anger can cause such physical problems as high blood pressure and respiratory trouble .
It can affect the liver and the pancreas , and it can cause digestive problems .
When we are angry , we do not always think clearly .
And at times a fit of anger may be followed by a prolonged period of depression .
On the other hand , “ a calm heart gives life to the body , ” says the Bible .
How , then , can we deal with hurt feelings and gain our brother ?
We can do so successfully by applying the Bible’s wise advice .
15 , 16 .
How should we approach someone who has offended us ?
Read Ephesians 4 : 26 .

We are not surprised when we have to endure harsh treatment from the world .
But when a fellow believer or a family member says or does something that hurts us deeply , we may be devastated .
Suppose we cannot simply forget the incident .
Will we allow resentment to fester for years ?
Or will we follow the Bible’s wise advice to settle matters quickly ?
The longer we put off dealing with the situation , the harder it will be for us to make peace with our brother .
Suppose you have been offended by a brother and you cannot put it behind you .
What positive steps can you take to make peace ?
First , approach Jehovah in earnest prayer .
Ask him to help you to have an upbuilding conversation with your brother .
Remember , he is one of Jehovah’s friends .
God loves him .
Jehovah treats his friends with kindness , and he expects no less from us .
Next , review in your mind what you are going to say .
Do not assume that your brother set out deliberately to hurt you ; give him the benefit of the doubt . And be open to the possibility that in some way you may have contributed to the rift .
You might begin the conversation by saying something like this , “ Perhaps I am being overly sensitive , but when you spoke to me yesterday , I felt . . . ”
If the discussion does not produce the results you desire , look for another opportunity to make peace .
In the meantime , pray for your brother ; ask Jehovah to bless him .
Ask God to help you focus on your brother’s positive qualities .
Whatever the outcome , you can be sure that Jehovah will be pleased with your sincere efforts to gain your brother ​ — God’s friend .
What means can Jehovah use to help us recover when we have committed a sin , and why should we take advantage of the provision ?
Some feel unworthy of serving Jehovah because they have committed a serious sin .
Guilt can be a harsh taskmaster .
King David , who struggled with guilt , put it this way : “ When I kept silent , my bones wasted away because of my groaning all day long .
For day and night your hand was heavy upon me . ”
Happily , David dealt with the problem like a man ​ — a spiritual man .
“ Finally I confessed my sin to you , ” he wrote , “ and you pardoned the error of my sins . ”
If you have sinned seriously , Jehovah is ready to help you recover .
But you must accept the help he provides through the congregation .
Do not delay ​ — your everlasting future is at stake !
But suppose that long after a transgression was forgiven , you still have pangs of conscience over past mistakes ?
How can Paul’s example help those who struggle with feelings of unworthiness ?
There were evidently times when the apostle Paul was distressed over past misdeeds .
He acknowledged : “ I am the least of the apostles , and I am not worthy of being called an apostle , because I persecuted the congregation of God . ”
Nevertheless , Paul added : “ But by God’s undeserved kindness I am what I am . ”

Jehovah accepted Paul for what he was , and He expected Paul to realize that about himself .
If you are sincerely repentant of past sins and have confessed them to the extent necessary , you can rest assured that Jehovah will be merciful .
So take Jehovah at his word , and accept his forgiveness ! ​ — Isa .
55 : 6 , 7 .
What is the yeartext for 2018 , and why is it appropriate ?
As this system nears its end , we can expect the pressures of life to increase .
Be assured , however , that the One who “ gives power to the tired one and full might to those lacking strength ” can give you whatever you need to carry on .
During 2018 , we will be reminded of this important truth every time we attend a meeting at the Kingdom Hall .
It is embodied in the words displayed there from our yeartext : “ Those hoping in Jehovah will regain power . ” ​ — Isa . 40 : 31 .
“ How good and how pleasant it is . . . to dwell together in unity ! ” ​ — PS .
133 : 1 .
SONGS : 18 , 14
benefit us personally ?
influence the unity of God’s people ?
motivate us to promote unity ?
1 , 2 .
What is the most unifying event of 2018 , and why ?

( See opening picture . )
ON March 31 , 2018 , as the sun begins to set , God’s people and many interested ones will assemble for the annual observance of the Lord’s Evening Meal .
As the planet turns on its axis , millions will gather to observe the Memorial of Christ’s death .
Each year , this observance is the most amazing unifying event that takes place on planet Earth !
We can only try to imagine how Jehovah and Jesus must rejoice as they observe hour after hour millions of earth’s inhabitants attending this special event until that day ends .
The Bible foretold that “ a great crowd , which no man [ would be ] able to number , out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues ” would shout : “ Salvation we owe to our God , who is seated on the throne , and to the Lamb . ”
How wonderful that Jehovah and Jesus are honored in this way by means of the annual Memorial observance ! What questions will this article answer ?
Some questions have arisen that this article will answer .
( 1 ) How can we individually prepare for the Memorial and benefit from attending it ?
( 2 ) In what ways does the Memorial influence the unity of God’s people ?
( 3 ) How can we personally contribute to that unity ?
( 4 ) Will there ever be a final Memorial ?
If so , when ?
Why is it important for us to be present at the Memorial if at all possible ?
Reflect on the importance of attending the Memorial .
Remember , congregation meetings are part of our worship .
Surely Jehovah and Jesus take note of who makes the effort to attend this most important meeting of the year .
Frankly , we want them to see that unless it is physically or circumstantially impossible , we will be present at the Memorial .
When we show by our actions that meetings for worship are important to us , we give Jehovah added reason to keep our name in his “ book of remembrance ” ​ — “ the book of life ” — ​ in which the names of those who are in line to attain to everlasting life are inscribed . ​ — Mal .
3 : 16 ; Rev . 20 : 15 .
In the days before the Memorial , how can we ‘ test whether we are in the faith ’ ?
In the days leading up to the Memorial , we can set aside time to examine prayerfully and carefully our personal relationship with Jehovah .
( Read 2 Corinthians 13 : 5 . )
How can we do that ?
By ‘ testing whether we are in the faith . ’
To do that , we do well to ask ourselves : ‘ Do I really believe that I am part of the only organization that Jehovah has approved to accomplish his will ?
Am I doing my utmost to preach and teach the good news of the Kingdom ?
Do my actions show that I truly believe that these are the last days and that the end of Satan’s rule is near ?
Do I have the same confidence in Jehovah and Jesus now that I had when I dedicated my life to Jehovah God ? ’
Pondering the answers to such questions will help us to keep proving what we ourselves are .
( a ) What is the only path to life ?
( b ) How does one elder prepare for the Memorial each year , and how might you do something similar ?
Read and meditate on Scriptural material that discusses the significance of the Memorial .
( Read John 3 : 16 ; 17 : 3 . )
The only path to everlasting life involves “ coming to know ” Jehovah and “ exercising faith ” in Jesus , His only - begotten Son .
To prepare for the Memorial , why not choose some study projects that will help you to draw closer to Jehovah and Jesus ?
Consider what one longtime elder has been doing .
Over the years , he has collected Watchtower articles that particularly discuss the Memorial and the love that Jehovah and Jesus have shown us .
In the weeks prior to the Memorial , he rereads these articles and meditates on the importance of this observance .
On occasion , he updates his collection with an article or two .
This elder has found that by rereading these articles and by reading and meditating on the Memorial Bible reading , he learns new things each year .
Most important , he feels that his love for Jehovah and Jesus deepens each and every year .
Such a study project may help you to deepen your love and appreciation for Jehovah and Jesus and thus may help you to benefit more fully from the Memorial .
( a ) What did Jesus pray for on the night of the first Lord’s Evening Meal ?
( b ) What shows that Jehovah has answered Jesus ’ prayer ?
On the night of the first Lord’s Evening Meal , Jesus prayed that his followers would all be united and that they would enjoy the same unity that he and his Father treasure .
( Read John 17 : 20 , 21 . )
Jehovah has indeed answered that prayer of his dear Son , and now millions believe that Jehovah sent his Son .
The Memorial , like no other meeting of God’s people , provides undeniable evidence of the unity of Jehovah’s Witnesses .
People of many nations and skin colors gather together in meeting places around the earth .
In some areas , the gathering of these different races at a religious meeting is unheard of or is looked down on by others .
But such unity is beautiful in the eyes of Jehovah and Jesus !
What message did Jehovah give Ezekiel regarding unity ?
As Jehovah’s people , we are not surprised at the unity we enjoy .
Jehovah , in fact , foretold it .
Consider the message he gave to the prophet Ezekiel regarding the joining together of two sticks , the stick “ for Judah ” and the stick “ for Joseph . ”
( Read Ezekiel 37 : 15 - 17 . )
The “ Questions From Readers ” published in The Watchtower of July 2016 explained : “ Jehovah gave Ezekiel a message of hope promising the unification of the nation of Israel after its being restored to the Promised Land .
That message also foretells the unification of God’s people that started to take place during the last days . ”
How is the fulfillment of Ezekiel’s prophecy in evidence each year at the Memorial ?
From the year 1919 onward , Jehovah first gradually reorganized and reunited the anointed , who were symbolically like the stick “ for Judah . ”
Then , as more and more of those with the earthly hope ​ — symbolically like the stick “ for Joseph ” — ​ joined the anointed , the two groups became “ one flock . ”
Jehovah promised to join these two sticks and make them one in his hand .

Now both groups serve unitedly under one King ​ — the glorified Jesus Christ , who is prophetically spoken of as God’s “ servant David . ”
The precious unity described in Ezekiel is clearly evident each year as the anointed remnant and the “ other sheep ” gather to observe the Memorial of Christ’s death !
What , though , can we individually do to preserve and promote that unity ?
How can we promote unity among God’s people ?
One way we can promote the unity of God’s people is by cultivating humility .
When on earth , Jesus admonished his disciples to humble themselves .
If we are lowly in heart , we will not give in to the worldly spirit of self - exaltation .
Rather , our humility will help us to be submissive to those taking the lead , and such an obedient spirit is essential for unity in the congregation .
Above all , our humility will please God , for he “ opposes the haughty ones , but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones . ” ​ — 1 Pet . 5 : 5 .
How can reflecting on the meaning of the Memorial emblems help us to promote unity ?
A second way we can promote unity is by reflecting on the meaning of the emblems used at the Memorial .
Prior to that special night ​ — and especially on that night — ​ give serious thought to the significance of the unleavened bread and the red wine .
The bread represents the sinless body of Jesus offered in sacrifice , and the wine pictures his shed blood .

But we need more than just an intellectual understanding of what those emblems mean .
Remember that the ransom sacrifice of Christ involved the two greatest expressions of love ​ — the love that Jehovah showed in giving his Son in our behalf , and the love that Jesus showed by willingly offering up his life for us .
Reflecting on their love should move us to love them in return .
And the love for Jehovah that we and our fellow worshippers share is like a cord that ties us together and strengthens our bond of unity .
When we are forgiving , we promote unity ( See paragraphs 12 , 13 )
In his illustration of the king settling accounts , how did Jesus make it clear that Jehovah expects us to be forgiving ?
A third way we can promote unity is by freely forgiving others .
When we forgive those who have offended us , we show that we appreciate the forgiveness of our own sins made possible by Christ’s ransom sacrifice .
Consider one of Jesus ’ illustrations as recorded at Matthew 18 : 23 - 34 .
Ask yourself : ‘ Am I moved to apply what Jesus taught ?
Do I show patience and understanding to my fellow servants ?
Am I ready to forgive those who sin against me personally ? ’
Granted , there are degrees of sin , and some offenses are very hard for imperfect humans to forgive .
Yet , this illustration teaches us what Jehovah expects .
( Read Matthew 18 : 35 . )
Jesus makes it clear that Jehovah will not forgive us if we do not forgive our brothers when there is a sound basis for doing so .
What a sobering thought !
We protect and preserve our precious unity when we forgive others as Jesus taught us to do .
How does proving ourselves to be peacemakers promote unity ?
When we forgive others , we prove ourselves to be peacemakers .
Recall the apostle Paul’s counsel that we should be “ earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace . ”
During this Memorial season and especially on the night of the Memorial , think deeply about how you treat others .
Ask yourself : ‘ Do I give clear evidence of being one who does not hold grudges ?
Am I known for going out of my way to promote peace and unity ? ’
These are serious questions to ponder at this time of the year .
How can we show that we are “ putting up with one another in love ” ?
A fourth way to promote unity is by showing love in imitation of Jehovah , the God of love .
Never would we want to say regarding fellow worshippers , “ I may have to love them , but I do not have to like them ” !
To think that way is contrary to Paul’s counsel that we should be “ putting up with one another in love . ”
Note that he did not simply say that we should be “ putting up with one another . ”
He added that we should do so “ in love . ”
There is a difference .
In our congregations are found all sorts of people whom Jehovah has drawn to him .
Since Jehovah has drawn them to him , he must find them lovable .
How , then , could any of us judge a fellow worshipper as being unworthy of our love ?
We must not hold back the love that Jehovah commands us to display ! ​ — 1 John 4 : 20 , 21 .
How do we know that there will be a final Memorial ?
One day the Memorial will be observed for the last time .
How do we know ?
In his first inspired letter to the Corinthians , Paul wrote to anointed Christians that by commemorating Jesus ’ death each year , they “ keep proclaiming the death of the Lord , until he comes . ”
The word “ comes ” here refers to the same event as the “ coming ” that Jesus mentioned in his prophecy about the time of the end .
Regarding the great tribulation just ahead of us , he said : “ The sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven , and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief , and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory .
And [ Jesus ] will send out his angels with a great trumpet sound , and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds , from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity . ”
This ‘ gathering of chosen ones ’ refers to the time when all anointed Christians who still remain on earth will receive their heavenly reward .
It will happen after the initial part of the great tribulation has passed but before the battle of Armageddon .
Then all of the 144,000 will share with Jesus in conquering the kings of the earth .
The last Memorial that is observed prior to this gathering of the anointed to heaven will be the final one , for Jesus will have ‘ come . ’
Why are you determined to be present at this year’s Memorial ?
May we be determined to benefit ourselves by attending the Memorial on March 31 , 2018 .
And let us ask Jehovah to help us keep contributing to the unity of his people !
( Read Psalm 133 : 1 . )
Remember , someday the Memorial we observe will be the final one .
Meanwhile , may we do our utmost to be in attendance , and may we treasure the pleasant unity experienced at the Memorial .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
At Riberalta , Beni , two pioneer couples load literature onto an airplane .
They are going to a remote area of the country to preach
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
“ O our God , we thank you and praise your beautiful name . ” ​ — 1 CHRON . 29 : 13 .
SONGS : 80 , 50
Why does Jehovah expect us to use our valuable things to give back to him ?
How did faithful ones in the past support the activities of Jehovah’s representatives financially ?
How does the organization use the money that is donated today ?
1 , 2 .
How does Jehovah generously use his material resources ?
JEHOVAH is a generous God .
Everything we have is from him .
Jehovah owns all the gold and silver along with all other natural resources of the earth , and he uses them to provide what is needed to sustain life .
The Bible contains numerous accounts of how Jehovah used his resources miraculously to provide for his people .
For 40 years , Jehovah supplied manna and water for the nation of Israel while they were in the wilderness .
As a result , “ they lacked nothing . ”


Through the prophet Elisha , Jehovah performed the miracle of multiplying the small quantity of oil for a faithful widow .

God’s gift enabled her to pay off her debts and after that to have enough money for her and her sons to live on .
With Jehovah’s support , Jesus miraculously provided food and even money when needed . ​ — Matt .
15 : 35 - 38 ; 17 : 27 .

What will we consider in this article ?
Jehovah has access to unlimited resources that can sustain his earthly creation .
However , he still invites his servants to use their material things to support the work of his organization .
What do we show Jehovah when we support his work ?
We give to Jehovah because of our love and appreciation for him .
We are overwhelmed when we consider all that Jehovah has done in our behalf .
When explaining the needs of the upcoming project to build the temple , King David acknowledged that everything we receive comes from Jehovah and that whatever we give to Jehovah is from what he has already given us . ​ — Read 1 Chronicles 29 : 11 - 14 .
How do the Scriptures show that unselfish giving is a fundamental aspect of true worship ?
Giving is also an expression of our worship of Jehovah .
In vision , the apostle John heard Jehovah’s servants in heaven say : “ You are worthy , Jehovah our God , to receive the glory and the honor and the power , because you created all things , and because of your will they came into existence and were created . ”
Would you not agree that Jehovah is worthy of all the glory and honor that we can give him by offering the best that we have ?
Through Moses , Jehovah commanded the nation of Israel to appear before Jehovah at three annual festivals .


As part of their worship at those festivals , the Israelites were not to “ appear before Jehovah empty - handed . ”
Likewise today , unselfish giving in appreciation for and in support of the work of the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization is a fundamental aspect of worship .
Why is giving good for us ?
( See opening picture . )
Giving is good for us . It is healthy for us to be generous givers and not just receivers .
( Read Proverbs 29 : 21 . )
We may think of a child who gives a gift to his parents from the small allowance they have given him .
How the parents appreciate this gift !
A son or a daughter who may be pioneering and living at home may rightly give the parents some funds to assist with household expenses .
Though the parents may not expect this , they may accept these gifts because it is a way for the child to show appreciation for all that they do for him .
Likewise , Jehovah realizes that giving from our valuable things is good for us .
7 , 8 .
How did Jehovah’s people in Bible times set an example in contributing ( a ) for specific projects ?
( b ) for the general support of the work ?

The aspect of giving from personal resources is well - established in the Scriptures .

In some cases , Jehovah’s people contributed for specific projects .
For example , Moses called for donations for the construction of the tabernacle , as did King David for the building of the temple .
During the time of King Jehoash , the priests used money that was collected to repair the house of Jehovah .
When the brothers in the early Christian congregation were made aware of the need that arose because of a famine , they “ determined , each according to what he could afford , to send relief to the brothers living in Judea . ” ​ — Acts 11 : 27 - 30 .
In other cases , Jehovah’s people gave financial support to those taking the lead in the work .
Under the Mosaic Law , the Levites did not receive an inheritance as the other tribes did .
Rather , the Israelites gave them a tithe , or a tenth part , that allowed the Levites to focus on their work at the tabernacle .
Similarly , Jesus and his apostles later benefited from the generosity of the women “ who were ministering to them from their belongings . ” ​ — Luke 8 : 1 - 3 .
What were some sources of contributions in times past ?
Of course , the sources of such donations varied .
When contributing for the building of the tabernacle in the wilderness , what the Israelites gave likely included what they had brought with them from Egypt .
In the first century , some Christians sold items that they owned , such as fields or houses , and brought the money to the apostles .
The apostles distributed these funds to those in need .
Others set aside money and gave regular donations to support the work .
Thus , people of all walks of life ​ — from the very wealthy to the very poor — ​ had a share . ​ — Luke 21 : 1 - 4 .
10 , 11 . ( a ) How can we imitate the generous servants of Jehovah in Bible times ?
( b ) How do you feel about the privilege you have to support the Kingdom work ?
Today , we too may be asked to make donations for a specific purpose .
For example , are there plans to build a new Kingdom Hall that your congregation will use ?
Or is your current Kingdom Hall being renovated ?
We may be made aware of financial needs with regard to renovations to our local branch office , a convention we are attending , or assistance to our brothers after a natural disaster .
We also donate to support those caring for the work at world headquarters and at branch offices around the earth .
Our donations support missionaries , special pioneers , and those in the circuit work .
Your congregation also no doubt has a standing resolution to assist financially with the worldwide program of building Assembly Halls and Kingdom Halls , which benefits our brothers throughout the earth .
All of us can have a share in supporting the work that Jehovah is accomplishing in these last days .
Most donations are anonymous .
We discreetly place funds in the contribution boxes at the Kingdom Hall , or we may make donations online through jw.org .
We may feel that our small donations do not mean much .
Yet , the majority of donated funds today come from many small gifts rather than from a few large ones .
Our brothers , even those who are in poor economic situations , are like the Macedonians who were in “ deep poverty ” and yet begged for the privilege to give and did so generously . ​ — 2 Cor .
8 : 1 - 4 .
How does the organization strive to make the best use of donated funds ?
With prayerful consideration , the Governing Body strives to be faithful and discreet with regard to how the organization’s funds are used .
The funds that are received are budgeted and spent accordingly .
In Bible times , stewards of dedicated funds followed procedures to make sure that donations were used only for their intended purposes .
For example , Ezra traveled back to Jerusalem with donated items from the Persian king ​ — gold , silver , and other materials worth well over $ 100 million ( U.S . ) in today’s values .
Ezra considered these funds to be voluntary offerings to Jehovah and put detailed procedures in place to protect these treasures on the perilous journey through hostile territory .
The apostle Paul collected funds as a relief ministration for the brothers in Judea .
He took steps to ensure that those delivering the funds cared for “ everything honestly , not only in the sight of Jehovah but also in the sight of men . ”
( Read 2 Corinthians 8 : 18 - 21 . )
Imitating the examples of Ezra and Paul , our organization today follows strict procedures when it comes to handling and spending donated funds .
How should we view recent simplifications in the organization ?
A family may make adjustments as they seek to balance income with expenses or as they consider how to simplify their life and reduce expenses in order to do more for Jehovah .
The same is true of Jehovah’s organization .
In recent years , there have been many exciting new initiatives .
At times , this resulted in more money going out than coming in for a period of time .
Thus , the organization looks for ways to reduce expenses and simplify the work so as to be able to accomplish the most that it can with your generous donations .
Your donations help our worldwide work ( See paragraphs 14 - 16 )
14 - 16 . ( a ) What are some of the things being accomplished with your donations ?
( b ) In what ways have you benefited from these provisions ?
Many longtime servants of Jehovah have been heard to say that they have never seen a time like this with so many spiritual provisions . Just think !
In recent years , we have seen the start of jw.org and JW Broadcasting . The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures is published in many more languages .
In 2014 / 2015 , some of the largest stadiums in 14 cities around the world became home for the three - day “ Keep Seeking First God’s Kingdom ! ”
International Conventions .
Those who attended were thrilled to be present .
Many have expressed appreciation for the outstanding benefits they are receiving from Jehovah’s organization .
For example , regarding the provision of JW Broadcasting , one couple serving in a country in Asia wrote : “ Our assignment is in a small city .
As a result , we sometimes feel isolated , and we easily forget the scope of Jehovah’s work .
But as soon as we watch the various programs on JW Broadcasting , we remember that we are part of an international brotherhood .
Our dear local brothers and sisters are very excited about JW Broadcasting .
We often hear them say that after watching the monthly programs , they feel close to the members of the Governing Body .
Now they are prouder than ever to be part of God’s organization . ”
Worldwide , nearly 2,500 Kingdom Halls are currently in the process of being built or extensively renovated .
After beginning to use their new Kingdom Hall , the members of one congregation in Honduras wrote : “ We feel truly happy to be part of Jehovah’s universal family and to enjoy our wonderful worldwide brotherhood , both of which helped to make our dream of having a Kingdom Hall in our community a reality . ”
Many express similar appreciation after receiving the Bible and other publications translated into their own language , after benefiting from relief work , or after seeing the results of metropolitan and public witnessing in their communities .

How does the way the organization operates today give evidence of Jehovah’s backing ?
Onlookers cannot understand how it is possible for us to do all this work using only voluntary donations .
After touring one of our printing facilities , an executive from a large company was amazed that all the work was accomplished by volunteers , with voluntary donations , and without any sales or fund drives .
He said that it should not be possible to do what we do . We agree !
We know that it is possible only because Jehovah is backing the work . ​ — Job 42 : 2 .
( a ) What blessings do we receive when we give in support of the Kingdom ?
( b ) How can we train our children and new ones to have a share ?
Jehovah dignifies us with the opportunity to support the grand work taking place today .
He guarantees that we will receive blessings when we give in support of the Kingdom .
Jehovah promises that the one who gives generously will prosper .
( Read Proverbs 11 : 24 , 25 . )
Giving also makes us happy , for “ there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving . ”
By word and example , we have the privilege of training our children and new ones to appreciate how they can have a share and how they , as a result , can enjoy many blessings .

How has this article encouraged you ?
Everything we have is from Jehovah .
Giving back to him shows that we love him and appreciate all that he has done in our behalf .
When donating for the construction of the temple , “ the people rejoiced over making these voluntary offerings , for they made the voluntary offerings to Jehovah with a complete heart . ”
May we likewise continue to find joy and satisfaction in giving back to Jehovah what has come to us from his own hand .
“ Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah ! ” ​ — PS .
144 : 15 .
SONGS : 111 , 109
How can we avoid loving ourselves excessively ?
Why are lovers of money not truly happy ?
How might we evaluate our pursuit of pleasure ?
Why is the time that we live in unique ?
WE LIVE in a time of human history that is truly unique .
As the Bible foretold , Jehovah is gathering “ a great crowd . . . out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues . ”
Those gathered constitute “ a mighty nation ” of more than eight million happy people who “ are rendering [ God ] sacred service day and night . ”
Never before have there been so many who have come to love both God and their fellow man .


What misdirected kind of love characterizes people who are alienated from God ?
( See opening picture . )
Yet , the inspired Scriptures also foretold that in our day , a misdirected kind of love characterized by selfishness would be shown by people who are alienated from God .
The apostle Paul wrote : “ In the last days . . . , men will be lovers of themselves , lovers of money , . . . lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God . ”
This self - centered kind of love is inconsistent with Christian love ; it stands in contrast with it .
Pursuing selfish goals does not bring people the happiness that they expect .
Indeed , such love fosters a selfish world that is “ hard to deal with . ”
What will we analyze in this article , and why ?

Paul recognized that widespread , selfish love would pose dangers for Christians .
Hence , he gave the warning to “ turn away ” from those whose love is misdirected .
However , we cannot avoid all contact with such people .
So how can we turn away from the worldly attitudes that surround us and strive to please Jehovah , the God of love ?
Let us contrast godly love with the love described at 2 Timothy 3 : 2 - 4 .
Doing so will help us evaluate and refine the love that we should show , the kind of love that brings true satisfaction and happiness .
Why is it not wrong to have a balanced love of self ?
“ Men will be lovers of themselves , ” wrote the inspired apostle .
Is it wrong for us to love ourselves ?
No , it is normal , even necessary , to have a healthy love of self .
Jehovah designed us that way . Jesus said : “ You must love your neighbor as yourself . ”
If we do not love ourselves , we cannot love our neighbor .

We also read in the Scriptures : “ Husbands should love their wives as their own bodies .
A man who loves his wife loves himself , for no man ever hated his own body , but he feeds and cherishes it . ”
So a proper love of self is desirable .
How would you describe those who have an excessive love of self ?
The love of self mentioned at 2 Timothy 3 : 2 is not a normal , healthy love .
It is a distorted , selfish love .
People who love themselves excessively think more of themselves than it is necessary for them to think .
( Read Romans 12 : 3 . )
Their main interest in life is themselves .
They care little about others .
When things go wrong , they tend to blame others rather than accept responsibility .
One Bible commentary likens those who are lovers of themselves to “ the hedgehog which . . . rolls itself up in a ball , keeping the soft , warm wool for itself . . . and . . . presents the sharp spines to those without . ”
Such self - centered people are not truly happy .
What results come from a love of God ?
Bible scholars suggest that love of self is put at the top of the apostle Paul’s list of negative qualities that would be prevalent during the last days because the other qualities result from it .
In contrast , people who love God produce a much different kind of fruitage .
The Bible associates godly love with joy , peace , patience , kindness , goodness , faith , mildness , and self - control .
“ Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah ! ”
wrote the psalmist .
Jehovah is a happy God , and his people reflect that quality .
Furthermore , unlike those who are lovers of themselves and who are interested only in receiving , Jehovah’s servants find delight in giving of themselves for the welfare of others . ​ — Acts 20 : 35 .
How can we avoid becoming lovers of ourselves ?
( See paragraph 7 )
What questions will help us to analyze our love of God ?
How can we determine if our love of God is being eclipsed by love of self ?
Consider the admonition found at Philippians 2 : 3 , 4 : “ Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism , but with humility consider others superior to you , as you look out not only for your own interests , but also for the interests of others . ”

We might ask ourselves : ‘ Do I apply that counsel in my life ?
Am I genuinely seeking to do God’s will ?
Do I reach out to help others , both in the congregation and in the field ministry ? ’
Giving of ourselves is not always easy .
It requires effort and self - sacrifice .
But what could make us happier than knowing that we have the approval of the Sovereign of the universe ?
What has the love of God moved some to do ?
Love of God has moved some to give up potentially lucrative careers to serve Jehovah more fully .
Ericka , who lives in the United States , is a physician .
But instead of pursuing a prestigious position in medicine , she became a regular pioneer and has served in several countries with her husband .
Thinking back , she says : “ The many experiences we have had in helping out in a foreign - language field , along with the friendships we have made , have truly enriched our lives .
I still practice medicine , but being able to focus most of my time and energy on helping to heal people spiritually and on caring for the needs of the congregation brings me heartfelt joy and inner satisfaction . ”
Why does a love of money not bring happiness ?
Paul wrote that people would be “ lovers of money . ”
Some years ago , a pioneer in Ireland spoke to a man about God .
The man took out his wallet , removed some paper money , held it up , and proudly said , “ This is my god ! ”
Though not many would be so open about the matter , the world is full of people who love money and the things it can buy .
Yet , the Bible cautions : “ A lover of silver will never be satisfied with silver , nor a lover of wealth with income . ”

Such people will always want more money , and striving to amass it , they will bring on themselves “ many pains . ” ​ — 1 Tim . 6 : 9 , 10 .
What does the Bible say about riches and poverty ?
We all need money , of course . It provides a measure of protection .
But can a person be truly happy if he has only enough for his basic needs ?
Absolutely !
( Read Ecclesiastes 5 : 12 . )
Agur son of Jakeh wrote : “ Give me neither poverty nor riches .
Just let me consume my portion of food . ”
We can readily understand his reason for not wanting to be extremely poor .
As he went on to explain , he did not want to be tempted to steal because theft would dishonor God .
But why did he pray not to have riches ?
He wrote : “ So that I do not become satisfied and deny you and say , ‘ Who is Jehovah ? ’ ”
Likely you can think of people who trust in their wealth rather than in God .
What counsel did Jesus give about money ?
Those who love money cannot please God .
Jesus said : “ No one can slave for two masters ; for either he will hate the one and love the other , or he will stick to the one and despise the other .
You cannot slave for God and for Riches . ”
He prefaced that by saying : “ Stop storing up for yourselves treasures on the earth , where moth and rust consume and where thieves break in and steal .
Rather , store up for yourselves treasures in heaven , where neither moth nor rust consumes , and where thieves do not break in and steal . ” ​ — Matt . 6 : 19 , 20 , 24 .
How may a simple life make it easier to serve God ?
Give an example .
Many have found that living a simple life not only makes them happier but also gives them more time to serve Jehovah .
Jack , who lives in the United States , sold his large home and business because he knew that doing so would make it possible for him to pioneer with his wife .
He reflects : “ It was hard to give up our beautiful home and property in the country .
Yet , for years , I would come home frustrated because of problems at work .
My wife , a regular pioneer , was always so happy .
She would say , ‘ I have the greatest boss ever ! ’
Now that I too am pioneering , we both work for the same Person , Jehovah . ”
How can we avoid becoming lovers of money ?
( See paragraph 13 )
How might we analyze our view of money ?
To analyze our view of money , we might honestly consider how we would answer these questions : ‘ Do I really believe and live in harmony with what the Bible says about money ?
Does making money come first in my life ?
Do I value material things more than my relationship with Jehovah and with people ?
Do I really trust in Jehovah to care for my needs ? ’
We can be sure that he will never disappoint those hoping in him . ​ — Matt . 6 : 33 .
What is a reasonable view of pleasures ?
As foretold , many people today are “ lovers of pleasures . ”
Just as there is nothing wrong with a healthy , reasonable view of self and money , there is nothing wrong with a balanced view of pleasures .
Jehovah does not want us to practice severe self - denial or to abstain from wholesome activities that bring enjoyment .
The Bible encourages faithful ones : “ Go , eat your food with rejoicing , and drink your wine with a cheerful heart . ” ​ — Eccl .
9 : 7 .
What type of pleasures is referred to at 2 Timothy 3 : 4 ?
Second Timothy 3 : 4 refers to a pursuit of pleasures that excludes God .
Notice that the verse does not say that people would love pleasures more than God , implying that they would have some love for him .
It says ‘ rather than God . ’
One scholar wrote : “ This [ verse ] definitely does not mean that they also love God to some extent .
It means that they do not love God at all . ”
What a sobering warning to those who are nurturing an inordinate love of pleasures !
The phrase “ lovers of pleasures ” aptly describes those who are “ carried away by . . . pleasures of this life . ” ​ — Luke 8 : 14 .
16 , 17 .
What example did Jesus set in the matter of pleasures ?
Jesus displayed a perfectly balanced view of pleasures .
He attended “ a marriage feast ” and “ a big reception feast . ”
At the wedding , he miraculously changed water into wine , adding to the supply , which had run short .
And on another occasion , he rejected the self - righteous views of those who criticized him for eating and drinking . ​ — Luke 7 : 33 - 36 .
Yet , Jesus did not immerse himself in a life of pleasure .
He put Jehovah first and expended himself tirelessly in behalf of others .
So that many might live , he willingly endured a painful death on a stake .

Addressing those who would follow in his footsteps , Jesus said : “ Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing against you for my sake .
Rejoice and be overjoyed , since your reward is great in the heavens , for in that way they persecuted the prophets prior to you . ” ​ — Matt .
5 : 11 , 12 .
How can we avoid becoming lovers of pleasures ?
( See paragraph 18 )
What questions will help us to analyze how much we love pleasures ?
How might we analyze how much we love pleasures ?
We do well to ask ourselves : ‘ Do meetings and field service take second place to entertainment ?
Am I willing to practice self - denial because I want to serve God ?
In seeking pleasurable activities , do I consider how Jehovah will view my choices ? ’
If we truly love God , we will be careful to avoid not only the things we know will displease him but also the things we merely suspect may displease him . ​ — Read Matthew 22 : 37 , 38 .
Who can never be truly happy ?
After some 6,000 years of human misery , Satan’s world is coming to its end .
The earth is filled with those who have an inordinate love of self , money , and pleasures .
They are people who are eager for what they can get , people who place their own wishes at the center of their life .
Such people can never be truly happy .
Instead , it is as the psalmist wrote : “ Happy is the one who has the God of Jacob as his helper , whose hope is in Jehovah his God . ” ​ — Ps . 146 : 5 .
How has the love of God brought you happiness ?

The love of God flourishes among Jehovah’s people , and our ranks are growing every year .
This is evidence that God’s Kingdom reigns and will soon bring to earth unimaginable blessings .
True and lasting joy comes from doing God’s will , from knowing that we are pleasing the Supreme One .
And those who love Jehovah will be joyful forever !
In the next article , we will consider some of the qualities that result from selfish love and see how these contrast with the qualities found in Jehovah’s servants .
“ You will . . . see the distinction between a righteous person and a wicked person . ” ​ — MAL .
3 : 18 .
SONGS : 127 , 101
the way we view ourselves ?
the way we relate to others ?
the way we strive to improve our personality ?
1 , 2 .
What challenge faces God’s people today ?
( See opening pictures . )
MANY health - care professionals work among those infected with contagious diseases .
They care for their patients because they want to help them .
In doing so , however , they need to protect themselves so that they do not become infected with the disease they are seeking to treat .
Likewise , many of us live and work with those who are infected with attitudes and characteristics that run counter to godly qualities .
This presents a challenge for us .
These last days are a time of moral chaos .
The apostle Paul’s second letter to Timothy describes the characteristics of people who are alienated from God , characteristics that will become more pronounced in the days ahead .
( Read 2 Timothy 3 : 1 - 5 , 13 . )
Though we may be shocked by the prevalence of such qualities , we could be influenced by the behavior and attitudes of those who display them .
In this article , we will consider how the qualities that characterize people of the last days stand in contrast with the qualities of God’s people .
We will also see how we can protect ourselves from being infected with negative traits while at the same time helping others spiritually .
To whom does the list of qualities found at 2 Timothy 3 : 2 - 5 apply ?
“ The last days , ” wrote the apostle Paul , would bring “ critical times hard to deal with . ”
He then listed 19 negative traits , or qualities , that would characterize people in this time period .
The list is similar to the one found at Romans 1 : 29 - 31 , though the list in Paul’s letter to Timothy includes terms that are not mentioned elsewhere in the Christian Greek Scriptures .
Paul introduces his list of ungodly qualities with the words “ for men will be . . . ”
The term “ men ” should be understood to mean “ people , ” since both men and women display such qualities .
However , these are not qualities exhibited by all people .
Christians have far different traits . ​ — Read Malachi 3 : 18 .
How would you describe those who are puffed up with pride ?

After stating that many would be lovers of themselves and of money , Paul wrote that people would also be boastful , haughty , and puffed up with pride , traits that often reflect a feeling of superiority because of one’s abilities , appearance , wealth , or rank .
People with such traits crave to be admired and adored .
One scholar wrote the following about the person who has an all - consuming pride : “ In his heart there is a little altar where he bows down before himself . ”
Some have said that inordinate pride is so distasteful that even the proud dislike it in others .
How have even faithful ones been overtaken by pride ?
Jehovah certainly detests pride . He hates “ haughty eyes . ”
Pride hinders approach to God .
It is a characteristic of the Devil .
Sadly , though , even some loyal servants of Jehovah have become infected with pride .
Uzziah , a king of Judah , proved faithful for years .
“ However , ” the Bible states , “ as soon as he was strong , his heart became haughty to his own ruin , and he acted unfaithfully against Jehovah his God by entering the temple of Jehovah to burn incense on the altar of incense . ”
Later , King Hezekiah too fell prey to haughtiness , though only temporarily . ​ — 2 Chron .
26 : 16 ; 32 : 25 , 26 .
What could have caused David to become proud , but why did he not ?
Some people become proud because of their good looks , popularity , musical ability , physical prowess , or exalted position .
David had not just one of these assets but all of them ; yet , he remained humble throughout his life .
After he killed Goliath and was offered the daughter of King Saul to be his wife , David said : “ Who am I and who are my relatives , my father’s family in Israel , for me to become son - in - law to the king ? ”
What helped David remain humble ?

The qualities , abilities , and privileges David had were because God ‘ stooped down , ’ or humbled himself , to pay attention to him .
David knew that he did not possess anything good that he had not received from Jehovah . ​ — Compare 1 Corinthians 4 : 7 .
What will help us to show humility ?
Like David , Jehovah’s people today strive to show humility .
We are awed by the knowledge that Jehovah , the greatest Person in the universe , manifests the appealing quality of humility .
We take to heart the inspired counsel : “ Clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion , kindness , humility , mildness , and patience . ”
We also know that love “ does not brag , does not get puffed up . ”
When we show humility , people may be drawn to Jehovah .
Just as husbands can be won without a word by the conduct of their wives , others can be drawn to God by the humility shown by his people . ​ — 1 Pet . 3 : 1 .
( a ) How is disobedience to parents viewed by some today ?
( b ) What do the Scriptures admonish children to do ?
Paul described how people living in the last days would relate to one another .
He wrote that in the last days , children would be disobedient to parents .
While such behavior is sometimes accepted and even encouraged in books , movies , and television programs today , disobedience undermines the stability of the most important social unit in society ​ — the family .
This principle has long been understood .
Interestingly , in ancient Greece , if a man struck his parents , he would lose all his civil rights ; in Roman law , to strike a father was as serious as murder .
Both the Hebrew Scriptures and the Christian Greek Scriptures admonish children to honor their parents . ​ — Ex .
20 : 12 ; Eph . 6 : 1 - 3 .
What will help young ones to be obedient to their parents ?
Children can protect themselves from being infected with the spirit of disobedience by reflecting on what their parents have done for them .
An appreciative attitude is bolstered by the understanding that obedience is required by God , the Father of us all .
By speaking positively about their parents , young ones can help other youths view their own parents in a positive light .
Of course , if parents have no natural affection for their children , it might be difficult for those children to obey from the heart .
On the other hand , when a youngster senses his parents ’ genuine love , he is moved to please them even when he is tempted to disobey .
“ Though I often felt inclined to try to get away with things , ” admits Austin , “ my parents set reasonable guidelines , explained the reasons for rules , and kept the lines of communication wide open .
This helped me to be obedient .
I could see that they cared for me , and that made me want to please them . ”
10 , 11 . ( a ) What negative qualities show that people lack love for one another ?
( b ) To what extent do true Christians love their fellow man ?
Paul lists other negative qualities that show that people lack love for one another .
Fittingly , unthankful follows “ disobedient to parents ” because it describes the attitude of those who lack appreciation for the kindnesses shown to them by others .
People would also be disloyal .
They would not be open to any agreement , displaying an unwillingness to become reconciled to other people .
They would be blasphemers and betrayers , directing abusive , injurious speech against humans and even against God .
And there would be slanderers , people who voice damaging reports meant to destroy the good reputation of others .
*
In contrast with the people who show the widespread lack of love today , those who worship Jehovah have genuine love for their fellow man .
This has always been true .
Jesus said that love of neighbor , a form of a·gaʹpe , was the second most important commandment in the Mosaic Law , second only to love of God .
Jesus also said that love for one another would be the quality that would identify true Christians .
( Read John 13 : 34 , 35 . )
Such Christian love would even be extended to one’s enemies . ​ — Matt . 5 : 43 , 44 .
How did Jesus show love for others ?
Jesus showed great love for others .
He went from city to city , telling people the good news about the Kingdom of God .
He cured the blind , the lame , the lepers , and the deaf .
He raised the dead .
Jesus even gave his own life in behalf of mankind , though many hated him .
Jesus ’ love perfectly reflected the love his Father shows .
Throughout the earth , Jehovah’s Witnesses express godly love toward others .
How may the love we show for others help them to draw close to Jehovah ?
The love we show for others draws people to our heavenly Father .
A man in Thailand , for example , was touched by the love he saw among the brothers at a regional convention .
Upon returning home , he asked to have a Bible study twice a week .
He preached to all his relatives , and just six months after the convention , he gave his first Bible reading at the Kingdom Hall .
To analyze how well we are doing in showing love for others , we might ask ourselves : ‘ Am I reaching out to help others in my family , in my congregation , and in my ministry ?
Do I strive to see others as Jehovah sees them ? ’
14 , 15 .
What animalistic qualities do many display , but how have some changed for the better ?

Other qualities displayed by people in the last days provide additional reasons for Christians to keep their distance from such people .
Godless ones would be without love of goodness , or as some translations render the expression , “ haters of good ” or “ hostile to all goodness . ”
They would be without self - control , fierce .
Some would be headstrong , or impulsive and reckless .
Many who formerly displayed such animalistic qualities have changed for the better .
This transformation was beautifully foretold in a Bible prophecy .
( Read Isaiah 11 : 6 , 7 . )
There we read about wild animals , such as wolves and lions , that live in peace with domestic animals , such as lambs and calves .
Notice that this tranquil state of affairs will prevail “ because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah . ”
Since animals cannot learn about Jehovah , the spiritual fulfillment of this prophecy applies to people .
Applying Bible principles transforms lives !
( See paragraph 16 )
How has the Bible helped people to transform their personalities ?
There are many who were once as fierce as wolves but who now live in peace with others .
You can read some of their experiences in the series “ The Bible Changes Lives , ” found on jw.org .
Those who have come to know and serve Jehovah are not like those who have an appearance of godliness but prove false to its power , who behave as if they worship God but belie that claim by their conduct .
Rather , formerly fierce people have “ put on the new personality that was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty . ”
As people learn about God , they see the need to conform to his standards .
They are then moved to make changes in their beliefs , attitudes , and conduct .
Such changes are not easy but can be made because God’s spirit will help those who sincerely desire to do God’s will .
How may we avoid being influenced by those who display ungodly qualities ?
The distinction between those serving God and those not serving him is becoming increasingly evident .
We who serve God must be careful that we do not become influenced by the unrighteous attitudes of others .
Wisely , we heed the inspired counsel to turn away from those described at 2 Timothy 3 : 2 - 5 .
Of course , we cannot completely avoid people with ungodly traits .
We might have to work with them , go to school with them , or live with them .
But we can avoid being drawn into their thinking and imitating their characteristics .
We do this by strengthening our spirituality through Bible study and close association with those who are determined to serve Jehovah .
How may our speech and conduct benefit others spiritually ?
We should also strive to help others spiritually .

Look for opportunities to witness , asking Jehovah to help you say the right thing at the right time .
We should let others know that we are Jehovah’s Witnesses .
That way , our fine conduct will bring glory to God and not to us .
We have been trained “ to reject ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things . ”
If we conduct ourselves in a godly way , others will observe us , and some may even say : “ We want to go with you , for we have heard that God is with you people . ” ​ — Zech . 8 : 23 .
The Greek word for “ slanderer ” or “ accuser ” is di·aʹbo·los , a term used in the Bible as a title for Satan , the wicked slanderer of God .

AT TIMES , yes . Consider one example .
Deuteronomy 24 : 14 , 15 states : “ You must not defraud a hired worker who is in need and poor , whether one of your brothers or a foreign resident in your land . . .
Otherwise , he will cry out to Jehovah against you , and you will be guilty of sin . ”
The pottery shard on which the farmworker’s plea was written


The record of a plea in such a case dated to the seventh century B.C.E .
It was found near Ashdod .
Possibly penned for a field worker who allegedly failed to deliver a set quota of grain , this document , written on a pottery shard , says : “ After your servant [ the petitioner ] had finished storing the harvest a few days ago , Hoshayahu son of Shobay came and took your servant’s garment . . . .
All my companions who were harvesting with me in the heat of the sun will testify . . . that what I have said is true .
I am innocent of any offense . . . .
If the governor does not consider it his obligation to have your servant’s garment sent back , do it out of pity !
You must not remain silent when your servant is without his garment . ”
This plea “ speaks to us of more than just the desperation of a labourer to get back [ his garment ] , ” says historian Simon Schama .
“ It also presupposes that the petitioner knew something about the biblical law code , especially the injunctions in Leviticus and Deuteronomy against harsh treatment of the poor . ”
3 Imitate the Faith and Obedience of Noah , Daniel , and Job
8 Do You Know Jehovah as Did Noah , Daniel , and Job ?
Noah , Daniel , and Job experienced many of the same kinds of problems we face today .
What enabled them to remain faithful and obedient ?
How did they come to know Jehovah so well that nothing could break their integrity ?
These two articles will consider those questions .
13 Life Story ​ — All Things Are Possible With Jehovah
18 What Does It Mean to Be a Spiritual Person ?
23 Move Forward as a Spiritual Person !
In the first of these two articles , we will see what spirituality is and what we can learn from exemplary spiritual people .
Then in the second article , we will consider how we can cultivate spirituality and put it to work in our daily lives .
28 Joy ​ — A Quality We Acquire From God
31 From Our Archives
“ Noah , Daniel , and Job . . . would be able to save only themselves because of their righteousness . ” ​ — EZEK . 14 : 14 .
SONGS : 89 , 119
Noah ?
Daniel ?
Job ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) Why can we take courage from the examples of Noah , Daniel , and Job ?
( b ) Under what circumstances did Ezekiel write the words recorded at Ezekiel 14 : 14 ?
ARE you dealing with trials , such as ill health , financial problems , or persecution ?
Do you at times find it hard to maintain your joy in Jehovah’s service ?

If so , take courage from the examples of Noah , Daniel , and Job .

They were imperfect , and they faced many of the challenges we face , including some that were life threatening .
Yet , they held on to their integrity , becoming models of faith and obedience in the eyes of God . ​ — Read Ezekiel 14 : 12 - 14 .
Ezekiel wrote the words of our theme text in Babylonia in 612 B.C.E .
* Apostate Jerusalem was nearing its foretold destruction , which occurred in 607 B.C.E .
Only relatively few individuals reflected the qualities of Noah , Daniel , and Job and were thus marked for survival .
Among those few were Jeremiah , Baruch , Ebed - melech , and the Rechabites .
What will we consider in this article ?
Likewise today , only those whom Jehovah considers blameless ​ — people like Noah , Daniel , and Job — ​ will be marked for survival when the present system of things comes to an end .
So let us consider why Jehovah used those men as examples of righteousness .
As we discuss each one , we will focus on ( 1 ) what challenges the man faced and ( 2 ) how we can imitate his faith and obedience .
4 , 5 .
What challenges did Noah face , and why was his endurance remarkable ?
Challenges that Noah faced .
By the time of Noah’s great - grandfather Enoch , people had become very ungodly .
They were even saying “ shocking things ” against Jehovah . Violence was increasing .
In fact , in Noah’s day , “ the earth was filled with violence . ”
Wicked angels materialized as humans , took wives , and produced brutal , hybrid offspring .
But Noah stood out as different .

“ Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah . . . .
He proved himself faultless among his contemporaries . Noah walked with the true God . ” ​ — Gen .
6 : 8 , 9 .
Consider what those words say about that righteous man .
For one thing , Noah did not walk with God in that wicked pre - Flood world for a mere 70 or 80 years ​ — the life span of many today .
He lived in that world for almost 600 years !
And unlike us today , he did not have a congregation of fellow worshippers ​ — evidently not even his siblings — ​ to turn to for spiritual support .
*
In what ways did Noah show great courage ?
Noah was not content just to lead a good life .
He also became a bold “ preacher of righteousness , ” publicly confessing his faith in Jehovah .
“ Through this faith he condemned the world , ” wrote the apostle Paul .
It stands to reason , therefore , that Noah faced ridicule and opposition , perhaps even threats of violence .
But he was not “ trembling at men . ”
Rather , he had the courage that Jehovah gives to his faithful servants .
When building the ark , what challenges did Noah face ?
After Noah had walked with God for more than five centuries , Jehovah told him to build an ark for the saving of human and animal life .
How difficult that project must have seemed ​ — and not just from the construction point of view !
Noah surely knew that it would bring on even more ridicule and opposition .
Still , he obediently went ahead in faith .
“ He did just so . ” ​ — Gen . 6 : 22 .
In what ways did Noah trust in Jehovah as his Provider ?
Another challenge for Noah was that of providing materially for his wife and children .
Before the Flood , people had to work extra hard to grow food , and Noah was surely no exception .
Even so , he centered his life , not on material concerns , but on God .
Even when building the ark , which may have taken as long as 40 or 50 years , Noah kept his spiritual focus .
And he continued to do so for another 350 years after the Flood .

What a fine example of faith and obedience !
9 , 10 . ( a ) How can we imitate Noah’s faith and obedience ?
( b ) How does God view all who uphold his standards ?
How we can imitate Noah’s faith and obedience .
We do so by upholding God’s righteousness , by being no part of Satan’s world , and by keeping Kingdom interests in first place .
To be sure , our way of life does not win us the world’s approval .
Indeed , even now , our firm stand for God’s laws , such as those concerning marriage and sexual morality , has led to negative publicity in some lands .
( Read Malachi 3 : 17 , 18 . )
Like Noah , however , we fear Jehovah , not men .
We know that he alone gives everlasting life . ​ — Luke 12 : 4 , 5 .
But what about you personally ? Will you keep ‘ walking with God , ’ even when others mock or criticize you or when economic pressures test your faith in your Provider ?
If you imitate the faith and obedience of Noah , you can be confident that Jehovah will care for you . ​ — Phil .
4 : 6 , 7 .
What big challenges did Daniel and his three companions face in Babylon ?
( See opening picture . )
Challenges that Daniel faced .
Daniel lived as a captive in Babylon , a city filled with idolatry and spiritism .
Moreover , the Babylonians looked down on the Jews , mocking both them and their God , Jehovah .
How this must have hurt faithful Jews like Daniel !
Also , he and his three companions ​ — Hananiah , Mishael , and Azariah — ​ were in the spotlight , as it were , because they were to be trained in the king’s service .
Even their diet was set for them .
In fact , food and drink soon became an issue because Daniel did not want to “ defile himself with the king’s delicacies . ” ​ — Dan . 1 : 5 - 8 , 14 - 17 .
( a ) What fine qualities did Daniel display ?
( b ) How did Jehovah view Daniel ?
A more subtle challenge for Daniel could have involved his exceptional abilities , which led to his receiving special privileges .
But instead of becoming arrogant and opinionated , he remained humble and modest , always giving due credit to Jehovah .
In fact , it was while Daniel was still a young man that Jehovah counted him worthy of being mentioned as an example of righteousness , along with Noah and Job .
Was God’s confidence in Daniel misplaced ?
Not at all !

Daniel stayed faithful and obedient to the very end of his life .
Indeed , he was likely in his late 90 ’ s when God’s angel warmly said to him : “ O Daniel , you very precious man . ” ​ — Dan .
10 : 11 . How may Daniel have been a blessing to his fellow Jews ?
As a result of divine favor , Daniel was made a high official under both Babylonian and Medo - Persian rule .
Perhaps Jehovah maneuvered matters this way so that Daniel could be a blessing to his own people , as were Joseph in Egypt and Esther and Mordecai in Persia .
* Imagine how comforting it must have been for the Jewish captives , including Ezekiel , to see Jehovah’s hand in matters in this way !
Jehovah views as precious those who maintain their integrity ( See paragraphs 14 , 15 )
14 , 15 . ( a ) In what ways are our circumstances similar to those of Daniel ?
( b ) What can parents today learn from Daniel’s parents ?
How we can imitate Daniel’s faith and obedience .
Today , we live as foreigners , as it were , in a world that has been morally and spiritually corrupted by Babylon the Great , the world empire of false religion , “ a dwelling place of demons . ”
Hence , we too stand out as different , even becoming targets for ridicule .

Like Daniel , therefore , let us draw close to Jehovah , our God .
When we humbly and obediently trust in him , we too will be precious in his eyes . ​ — Hag . 2 : 7 .
Parents can learn from the example of Daniel’s parents .
How so ?
Despite the wickedness that prevailed in Judah during Daniel’s early childhood , the boy grew to love God .
This , of course , was no accident .
It reflected good parental training .
Even Daniel’s name , which means “ My Judge Is God , ” points to God - fearing parents .
So parents , do not give up on your children , but teach them patiently .
Also , pray with them and for them .

When you strive to impress Bible truth on their hearts , you invite Jehovah’s rich blessing . ​ — Ps . 37 : 5 .
16 , 17 .
What contrasting challenges did Job experience ?

Challenges that Job faced .
The life of Job is a study in contrasts .

Before his trial , he was “ the greatest of all the people of the East . ”
He was wealthy , well - known , and highly respected .
Yet , despite all of this , Job did not develop a lofty view of himself or feel that he did not need God .
In fact , Jehovah called him “ my servant , ” adding : “ He is an upright man of integrity , fearing God and shunning what is bad . ” ​ — Job 1 : 8 .
In a very short space of time , Job’s life changed dramatically .

He was driven to the depths of poverty and despair .
The cause , we know , was the slanderer Satan , who lyingly accused Job of worshipping God out of self - interest .
( Read Job 1 : 9 , 10 . )
Jehovah did not sweep aside that wicked accusation .
Instead , he gave Job the opportunity to prove his integrity , to show that his worship stemmed from a pure , unselfish heart .
( a ) What impresses you about Job’s integrity ?
( b ) What do Jehovah’s dealings with Job reveal about Him ?

Satan launched a series of vicious attacks against Job , leading Job to assume that God was to blame .
Then three false comforters arrived and attacked Job with cruel words , basically saying that God was giving him what he deserved !
Yet , Job maintained his integrity .
Yes , he spoke rashly at times , but Jehovah understood the pain Job felt .
God saw a deeply depressed man who never turned his back on Him , even though Satan , in effect , threw Job to the ground and then verbally kicked him with lying insults .

When the trial was over , Jehovah gave Job double what he had before the trial began , as well as an added 140 years of life .
During that time , he continued to give Jehovah exclusive devotion .
How can we be sure ?
Job had been dead for many centuries when Ezekiel recorded the words of our theme text .
19 , 20 . ( a ) How can we imitate Job’s faith and obedience ?
( b ) In our dealings with others , how can we reflect God’s compassion ?
How we can imitate Job’s faith and obedience .
No matter what our circumstances may be , let us always keep Jehovah at the center of our lives , trusting him fully and obeying him with a complete heart .
Indeed , we have even more reason to do so than Job had ! Consider : We know a lot about Satan and his tactics .
Thanks in part to the book of Job , we know why God permits suffering .
From Daniel’s prophecy , we understand that God’s Kingdom is a world government in the hands of Christ Jesus .
And we know that this Kingdom will soon bring a permanent end to all suffering .
Job’s experience also highlights our need to show compassion to fellow Christians who may be enduring hardships .
Like Job , some may even speak rashly at times .
But instead of judging them , let us show insight and compassion . In this way , we imitate our loving and merciful Father , Jehovah . ​ — Ps .
103 : 8 .
How do the words at 1 Peter 5 : 10 reflect what occurred in the lives of Noah , Daniel , and Job ?
Although Noah , Daniel , and Job lived at different times and under very different circumstances , they endured the challenges they faced .
Their life stories call to mind the words of the apostle Peter , who wrote : “ After you have suffered a little while , the God of all undeserved kindness . . . will himself finish your training .
He will make you firm , he will make you strong , he will firmly ground you . ” ​ — 1 Pet . 5 : 10 .
What will we consider in the next article ? Through Peter’s inspired words , Jehovah assures us that he will make his servants firm and strong .
These words also apply to God’s people today .
All of us desire to be made strong by Jehovah and to remain firm in our worship .
Therefore , we want to imitate the faith and obedience of Noah , Daniel , and Job !
As we shall see in the next article , the key to their integrity was that they truly knew Jehovah .
In fact , they ‘ understood everything ’ he required of them .
The same can be true of us .
Ezekiel was taken into exile in 617 B.C.E .
Ezekiel 8 : 1 – 19 : 14 is dated “ in the sixth year ” of that exile , or 612 B.C.E .

Noah’s God - fearing father , Lamech , died about five years before the Flood .
If Noah’s mother and siblings were alive when the Flood began , they did not survive it .
The same may have been true of Daniel’s three companions , who were also given positions of authority . ​ — Dan .
2 : 49 .
“ Evil men cannot understand justice , but those who seek Jehovah can understand everything . ” ​ — PROV .
28 : 5 .
SONGS : 126 , 150
Noah ?
Daniel ?
Job ?
1 - 3 . ( a ) What will help us to remain faithful to God during these last days ?
( b ) What will we consider in this article ?
AS THE last days near their end , the wicked continue to “ sprout like weeds . ”
It comes as no surprise , therefore , that moral standards are being abandoned .
In this environment , how can we “ be young children as to badness ” yet “ full - grown in [ our ] understanding ” ? ​ — 1 Cor .
14 : 20 . The answer is found in our theme text , which says in part : “ Those who seek Jehovah can understand everything ” ​ — that is , everything necessary to please him .
A similar thought is expressed at Proverbs 2 : 7 , 9 , which says that Jehovah “ treasures up practical wisdom for the upright . ”
As a result , the upright are able to “ understand what is righteous and just and fair , the entire course of what is good . ”
Noah , Daniel , and Job acquired that wisdom .
The same is true of God’s people today .
What about you personally ?
Do you “ understand everything ” necessary to please Jehovah ?
The key is to have accurate knowledge of him .
With that in mind , let us consider ( 1 ) how Noah , Daniel , and Job came to know God , ( 2 ) how that knowledge benefited them , and ( 3 ) how we can develop a faith like theirs .
How did Noah come to know Jehovah , and how did accurate knowledge help him ?
How Noah came to know Jehovah .
Since early in human history , men and women of faith have learned about God in three primary ways : by observing the visible creation , from other God - fearing humans , and by experiencing the blessings of living in harmony with God’s righteous standards and principles .
By observing the physical creation , Noah would have seen abundant evidence not only of God’s existence but also of his many invisible qualities , such as “ his eternal power and Godship . ”

As a result , Noah did more than believe in God ; he developed strong faith in him .
How did Noah become familiar with God’s purpose for mankind ?
Faith “ follows the thing heard . ”
How did Noah hear about Jehovah ?
He no doubt learned much from his relatives .
These included his father , Lamech , who was a man of faith and whose life overlapped Adam’s .
( See opening picture . )
They also included his grandfather Methuselah and his great - great - grandfather Jared , whose life overlapped Noah’s by 366 years .
* Perhaps from these men and possibly from their wives , Noah learned about mankind’s start , God’s purpose that a righteous human family fill the earth , and the rebellion in Eden ​ — the results of which Noah could see for himself .
In any event , what Noah learned touched his heart , moving him to serve God . ​ — Gen . 6 : 9 .
6 , 7 .
How did hope reinforce Noah’s faith ?
Faith is reinforced by hope .
Imagine , then , how Noah must have felt when he learned that his name , which probably means “ Rest ; Consolation , ” embodied hope ! Under inspiration , Lamech said : “ This one [ Noah ] will bring us comfort from . . . the painful toil of our hands because of the ground that Jehovah has cursed . ”
Noah had hope in God .
Like Abel and Enoch before him , he believed in the “ offspring ” who would bruise the serpent’s head . ​ — Gen .
3 : 15 .
While Noah may not have grasped the details of the prophecy recorded at Genesis 3 : 15 , he no doubt saw in it the hope of deliverance .
Moreover , that Edenic promise harmonized with the message proclaimed by Enoch , who also foretold God’s judgment of the wicked .
Enoch’s message , which will have its final fulfillment at Armageddon , surely reinforced Noah’s faith and hope !
In what ways did accurate knowledge of God protect Noah ?
How accurate knowledge of God benefited Noah .
Accurate knowledge gave Noah faith and godly wisdom , which protected him from harm , especially spiritual harm .
For instance , because Noah “ walked with the true God , ” he did not walk , or associate , with the ungodly .
He was not fooled by the materialized demons , who surely impressed faithless , gullible humans with their superhuman abilities ​ — perhaps even to the point of becoming objects of idolatry .
Also , Noah knew that humans were told to reproduce and fill the earth .
Hence , he must have known that sexual unions between women and materialized spirits were both unnatural and wrong .
That conclusion was no doubt confirmed when those unions produced abnormal offspring .

In time , God warned Noah that He was going to bring a flood upon the earth .
Noah’s faith in that warning moved him to build the ark , thus saving his household . ​ — Heb .
11 : 7 .
9 , 10 .
How can we imitate Noah’s faith ?
How we cultivate faith like Noah’s .
The key is to be good students of God’s Word , to take to heart what we learn , and to let that knowledge mold us and guide us .
Then faith and godly wisdom will protect us from Satan’s clever designs and from the world’s evil spirit .
That spirit fosters a love for violence and immorality . And it impels people to focus on fleshly desires .
It may even move the spiritually weak to ignore the evidence of the closeness of God’s great day .
Note that when Jesus compared our time with Noah’s , he focused , not on violence or immorality , but on the dangers of spiritual apathy . ​ — Read Matthew 24 : 36 - 39 .
Ask yourself : ‘ Does my way of life indicate that I truly know Jehovah ?
Does my faith impel me not only to live in harmony with God’s righteous standards but also to proclaim them ? ’
May your answers show that you too ‘ walk with the true God . ’
( a ) Daniel’s godly devotion as a youth reveals what about his upbringing ?

( b ) What qualities of Daniel would you like to imitate ?
How Daniel came to know Jehovah .
Daniel was evidently well - instructed by his parents , who taught him to love Jehovah and his written Word .
Moreover , that love stayed with Daniel all his life .
Even in his old age , we find him poring over the Scriptures .

Daniel’s intimate knowledge of God , including God’s dealings with Israel , is beautifully reflected in the prophet’s heartfelt and contrite prayer recorded at Daniel 9 : 3 - 19 .
Why not take a few moments to read that prayer and meditate on it , taking special note of what it tells you about Daniel as a person ?
12 - 14 . ( a ) In what ways did Daniel show godly wisdom ?
( b ) How was Daniel blessed for his courageous loyalty to God ?
How accurate knowledge of God benefited Daniel .
For a faithful Jew , life in pagan Babylon presented big challenges .
For instance , Jehovah told the Jews : “ Seek the peace of the city to which I have exiled you . ”
Yet , at the same time , he required their exclusive devotion .
What enabled Daniel to balance the two requirements ?
Godly wisdom helped him to grasp the principle of relative subjection to secular authorities .
Centuries later , Jesus taught the very same principle . ​ — Luke 20 : 25 .
Consider what Daniel did when an official decree forbade prayer to any god or man other than the king for 30 days .
( Read Daniel 6 : 7 - 10 . )
Daniel could have made excuses , saying , ‘ Thirty days is not forever ! ’
But he refused to let a royal edict override his Scriptural obligations .
Of course , he could have prayed discreetly so as not to be observed .
He knew that his daily custom was well - known .
So while it meant risking his life , Daniel decided not to give even the impression that he was compromising in his worship .
Jehovah blessed Daniel’s conscientious and courageous decision by miraculously sparing him a cruel death .
In fact , the outcome resulted in a marvelous witness for Jehovah that reached the farthest parts of the Medo - Persian Empire ! ​ — Dan .
6 : 25 - 27 .
How can we cultivate faith like that of Daniel ?
How to cultivate faith like Daniel’s .
The key to strong faith is not simply to read God’s Word but to ‘ get the sense ’ of it .
We want Jehovah’s mind on matters , which includes grasping Bible principles .
Hence , we need to meditate on what we read .
Also important is regular heartfelt prayer , especially when we face trials or other challenging situations .
When we pray in faith for wisdom and strength , Jehovah will generously give them to us . ​ — Jas . 1 : 5 .
16 , 17 .
How did Job gain an accurate knowledge of God ?
How Job came to know Jehovah .
Job was not an Israelite .
He was , however , a distant relative of Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob , and Jehovah had revealed details to them about himself and his purpose for mankind .
In some undisclosed way , Job learned many of those precious truths .
“ My ears have heard about you , ” he said .
Moreover , Jehovah himself stated that Job spoke truthfully about Him . ​ — Job 42 : 7 , 8 .
Our faith is strengthened when we see God’s invisible qualities in the visible creation ( See paragraph 17 )

Job also saw many of God’s invisible qualities in the visible creation .
Later , both Elihu and Jehovah used aspects of creation to remind Job of man’s insignificance compared with God’s greatness .
Jehovah’s words reached Job’s heart , for he humbly said to God : “ Now I know that you are able to do all things and that nothing you have in mind to do is impossible for you . . . .
I repent in dust and ashes . ” ​ — Job 42 : 2 , 6 .
18 , 19 .
In what ways did Job show that he truly knew Jehovah ?
How accurate knowledge of God benefited Job .
Job had outstanding insight into godly principles .
He truly knew Jehovah , and he acted on that knowledge .
Consider : Job knew that he could not profess to love God and at the same time be unkind to his fellow man .
He did not elevate himself above others but showed brotherly concern for all , rich and poor .
“ Did not the One who made me in the womb also make them ? ” he said .
Clearly , Job had not allowed his earlier prestige and wealth to warp his view of himself or others .
What a contrast to many of the powerful and wealthy in the world !
Job rejected all forms of idolatry ​ — even in his heart .
He knew that false worship , including devotion to material riches , would be a denial of “ the true God above . ”
( Read Job 31 : 24 - 28 . )
He viewed marriage as a sacred bond between a man and a woman .
He even made a covenant with his eyes not to look immorally at a virgin .
Keep in mind that this was at a time when God tolerated polygamy .
So Job could have taken a second wife had he wanted to .
* Evidently , though , he took as a pattern the marital union that God established in Eden , making that example a law to himself .
Some 1,600 years later , Jesus Christ taught his listeners to adhere to the same righteous principles regarding marriage and sexual morality . ​ — Matt .
5 : 28 ; 19 : 4 , 5 . How does accurate knowledge of Jehovah and of his standards help us in choosing good associates and wholesome entertainment ?
How we cultivate faith like Job’s .
The key , once again , is to have accurate knowledge of Jehovah and to let that knowledge guide us in every aspect of life .
For example , the psalmist David states that Jehovah “ hates anyone who loves violence , ” and David warns against associating “ with deceitful men . ”
( Read Psalm 11 : 5 ; 26 : 4 . )
What insight do those scriptures give you into God’s thinking ?
How should that insight influence your priorities , use of the Internet , and choice of associates and entertainment ?
Your answers may help you to see how well you know Jehovah .
To remain blameless in today’s complex and wicked world , we must train our “ powers of discernment ” so that we can distinguish not just right from wrong but also wise from unwise . ​ — Heb . 5 : 14 ; Eph .
5 : 15 . What will enable us to “ understand everything ” we need to know to please our heavenly Father ?
Because Noah , Daniel , and Job searched for Jehovah with all their heart , he let himself be found by them .
He helped them to “ understand everything ” necessary to please him .
They thus became examples of righteousness , and they led truly successful lives .
So ask yourself , ‘ Do I know Jehovah as well as Noah , Daniel , and Job did ? ’
In fact , thanks to increased spiritual light , you can know him even more fully !
So dig deeply into God’s Word .
Meditate on it .
And pray for holy spirit .
Then you will draw ever closer to your heavenly Father .
And you will act with insight and wisdom in today’s ungodly world . ​ — Prov .
2 : 4 - 7 .
Noah’s great - grandfather Enoch also “ kept walking with the true God . ”
However , “ God took him ” some 69 years before Noah was born . ​ — Gen . 5 : 23 , 24 .
The same could be said of Noah .
He had just one wife , even though polygamy began to be practiced soon after the rebellion in Eden . ​ — Gen . 4 : 19 .
LOVE JOY
PEACE
PATIENCE
KINDNESS
GOODNESS
FAITH
MILDNESS
SELF - CONTROL
PEOPLE normally want to live a joyful life .
But in these last days , everyone faces trials that are “ hard to deal with . ”

Injustice , poor health , unemployment , grief , or other causes of anxiety and sorrow may gradually cause some to lose their joy .
Even servants of God may become discouraged and see their joy slip away .
If this has happened to you , how can you regain your joy ?
To answer that question , we first need to understand what genuine joy is and how others have remained joyful despite trials .
Then we will learn what we can do to maintain our joy and even add to it .
We should not confuse being joyful with simply being jovial or cheerful .
To illustrate : After too many drinks , a drunkard may be in a hilarious mood .
However , when he sobers up , he laughs no more , and he may return to a life full of sorrow and troubles .
His momentary exuberance was not true joy . ​ — Prov .
14 : 13 .
Joy , in contrast , is a deep - seated quality of the heart .
It has been defined as “ the emotion excited by the acquisition or expectation of good . ”
Joy is a state of happiness or gladness that remains whether the conditions around us are pleasant or not .
In fact , a person can be disturbed about something but still have joy in his heart .
For example , the apostles were flogged for speaking about the Christ .
Yet , they “ went out from before the Sanhedrin , rejoicing because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of his name . ”
Obviously , they were not rejoicing over the flogging they had received . But as servants of God , they found true joy in keeping their integrity to him .
We are not born with such joy ; nor does it develop automatically .
Why not ?
Because true joy is part of the fruitage of God’s holy spirit .
With the help of God’s spirit , we can fully develop “ the new personality , ” which includes joy .
And when we develop joy , we are better able to cope with the stresses of life .
Jehovah intended for good things to develop on the earth , not the bad things that we see so often today .

Yet , the wicked deeds of others do not rob Jehovah of joy .
God’s Word states : “ Strength and joy are in his dwelling place . ”
Furthermore , the good things that are being accomplished by his servants make “ [ Jehovah’s ] heart rejoice . ” ​ — Prov .
27 : 11 . We can imitate Jehovah by not becoming overly concerned when things do not work out as we had expected .
Rather than lose our joy , we can focus on the good things we have now and wait patiently for the better things ahead .
*
We can also find many Biblical examples of humans who maintained joy in the face of trying circumstances .
Abraham is one who endured life - threatening situations and difficulties caused by others .
Despite such pressures , Abraham maintained joy in his heart .
How did he do so ?
He had clearly in mind his hope of living in the new world under the Messiah’s rule .
Jesus said : “ Abraham your father rejoiced greatly at the prospect of seeing my day . ”
We can imitate Abraham by pondering the joys ahead . ​ — Rom . 8 : 21 .
Like Abraham , the apostle Paul and his companion Silas were focused on God’s promises .
They had strong faith , and they kept their joy alive despite negative experiences .
For example , after they had endured a dreadful beating and were thrown into prison , in “ the middle of the night , [ they ] were praying and praising God with song . ”
In addition to drawing strength from their hope , Paul and Silas were joyful because they were suffering for the sake of Christ’s name .
We can imitate Paul and Silas by keeping in mind the good that comes from serving God faithfully . ​ — Phil . 1 : 12 - 14 .

Today , our brotherhood includes many fine examples of individuals who maintained joy in the face of trials .
For instance , in November 2013 , Super Typhoon Haiyan ripped through the central part of the Philippines , destroying the homes of over 1,000 Witness families .
George , whose home in the city of Tacloban was obliterated , said : “ In spite of what happened , the brothers are happy .
It’s hard for me to express the joy we feel . ”
Whenever we experience great difficulties , we will remain joyful if we meditate appreciatively on what Jehovah has done for us .
What else has Jehovah provided that gives us reason for joy ?
What greater reason for joy could we have than our relationship with God ? Think of it : We know the Universal Sovereign .
He is our Father , God , and Friend ! ​ — Ps .
71 : 17 , 18 .
We also treasure the gift of life and our ability to enjoy it .
As intelligent creatures who have been drawn by Jehovah , we understand God’s will for us .
Hence , we have real meaning and direction in our lives .
On the other hand , the majority of mankind have no clear concept of life’s purpose .
Highlighting this contrast , Paul wrote : “ ‘ Eye has not seen and ear has not heard , nor have there been conceived in the heart of man the things that God has prepared for those who love him . ’
For it is to us God has revealed them through his spirit . ”
Do we not rejoice over our understanding of Jehovah’s will and purpose ?
Consider what else Jehovah has done for his people .
Are we not happy that our sins can be forgiven ?
Because of God’s mercy , we have a living hope that a new world will soon be here .
Even now , Jehovah provides a wholesome group of fellow worshippers .
God’s Word also assures us that Jehovah protects his people from Satan and his demons .
If we meditate on all these blessings from God , we will see our joy deepen and grow . ​ — Phil . 4 : 4 .
Can an already joyful Christian increase his joy ?
Jesus said : “ These things I have spoken to you , so that my joy may be in you and your joy may be made full . ”
Does this not indicate that we can grow in joy ?
You can compare your efforts at increasing joy to stoking a fire .
You must feed the fire to intensify the heat .
Likewise , you must feed your spirituality to increase your joy .
Remember : Joy is fueled by God’s spirit . Hence , you will develop greater joy by regularly requesting the help of Jehovah’s spirit and prayerfully meditating on his spirit - inspired Word . ​ — Ps .
1 : 1 , 2 ; Luke 11 : 13 . You also increase your joy by being active in works that please Jehovah .
Why ?
Because we were created to “ fear the true God and keep his commandments , for this is the whole obligation of man . ”
In other words , we were designed to do God’s will .
So when we serve Jehovah , we naturally get the most enjoyment from life .
*
As we develop godly joy , we will experience benefits that go beyond simply how we feel inside .
For example , we will become more pleasing to our heavenly Father as we joyfully serve him no matter what problems we may face .
Also , as a result of having true joy , we will reject a materialistic way of life and will instead seek to make greater personal sacrifices in behalf of God’s Kingdom .
When we see the good that this accomplishes , we will grow in joy , experience a greater sense of well - being , and add to the happiness of others . ​ — Acts 20 : 35 ; Phil . 1 : 3 - 5 .
“ If you are happy and satisfied with your life now , you are more likely to be healthy in the future . ” That is what a researcher at the University of Nebraska in the United States wrote after reviewing a number of studies on health .
This is in agreement with the Bible , which says : “ A joyful heart is good medicine . ”
Yes , as you increase your joy , you are likely to have better physical health .
So despite living in stressful times , we can develop true and lasting joy as we acquire holy spirit by means of prayer , study , and meditation on Jehovah’s Word .
We also increase our joy as we reflect on our current blessings , imitate the faith of others , and seek to do God’s will .

In all such ways , we can share in the truth of Psalm 64 : 10 , which says : “ The righteous one will rejoice in Jehovah and take refuge in him . ”
The quality of patience will be considered in a future article in this series on “ the fruitage of the spirit . ”
For additional ways to enhance your joy , see the box “ Other Ways to Increase Joy . ”
Keep your life simple and uncluttered . ​ — Luke 12 : 15 .
Be modest in your expectations . ​ — Mic . 6 : 8 .
Make sure that your schedule ( for employment , schooling , recreation , and so forth ) allows you to pursue spiritual goals . ​ — Eph . 5 : 15 , 16 .
Be reasonable with yourself and others . ​ — Phil . 4 : 5 .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
A Witness couple share the Bible’s message of good news with a mother who picked up her son from school .
She wears a traditional head scarf
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
LIFE STORY
As told by Beishenbai Berdibaev
“ DEATH will be no more , and even the dead will be brought back to life . ”
My wife , Mairambubu , overheard these words while traveling on a bus .
She was curious and wanted to learn more .

Once the bus stopped and the passengers disembarked , she chased after the woman who had spoken those words .
Her name was Apun Mambetsadykova , and she was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses .
Talking to the Witnesses in those days was risky , but what we later learned from Apun transformed our lives .
I was born in 1937 on a kolkhoz , or collective farm , near Tokmok , Kyrgyzstan .
Our family belong to the Kyrgyz people , and we speak the Kyrgyz language .
My parents were farmworkers , and they worked on the kolkhoz from dawn to dusk .
Peasants were given regular food supplies , but cash wages were paid only once a year .
Mother struggled to care for my younger sister and me .
After just five years of schooling , I too began working full - time on the kolkhoz .
Teskey Ala - Too mountain range
In the region where I lived , poverty was widespread , and the work it took to make ends meet was exhausting .
As a young man , I gave little thought to the purpose of life or to the future .
I never imagined that the wonderful truths about Jehovah God and his purpose would transform my life .
How that message reached Kyrgyzstan and spread here is a thrilling story .
It all started in my home region of northern Kyrgyzstan .
The truth about Jehovah God took root in Kyrgyzstan in the 1950 ’ s .
To do so , the truth had to overcome a powerful ideology .
Why ?
What is now Kyrgyzstan then belonged to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR ) .
All over the USSR , Jehovah’s Witnesses remained neutral in political matters .
Hence , they were persecuted as enemies of the Communist state . But no ideology can stop the Word of God from reaching the hearts of honest people .
Indeed , one of the most valuable lessons I have learned in all my long life is that with Jehovah , “ all things are possible . ” ​ — Mark 10 : 27 .
Emil Yantzen
The persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses led to their expansion in Kyrgyzstan .
Why is that ?
The USSR included the region of Siberia , where enemies of the State were exiled .
When these exiles were released , many came to Kyrgyzstan , and some of them brought the truth with them .
One such former exile was Emil Yantzen , who had been born in Kyrgyzstan in 1919 .
Emil was sent to a labor camp and met the Witnesses there .

He accepted the truth and returned home in 1956 .
Emil settled near Sokuluk , in my home region .
Sokuluk is where the first congregation in Kyrgyzstan was formed in 1958 .
Victor Vinter
About one year later , Victor Vinter moved to Sokuluk .
This faithful brother suffered repeated hardships .
Twice he served three - year sentences for upholding neutrality ; then he spent a further ten years in prison plus five years in exile .
Still , persecution did not stop the expansion of true worship .
Eduard Varter
By 1963 there were about 160 Witnesses in Kyrgyzstan , many of them originally from Germany , Ukraine , and Russia .
They included Eduard Varter , an exile who had been baptized in Germany in 1924 .
In the 1940 ’ s , the Nazis had sent him to a concentration camp , and a few years later , Communists in the USSR had sent Eduard into exile .
In 1961 this faithful brother moved to the town of Kant , which lies very close to my hometown .
Elizabeth Fot ; Aksamai Sultanalieva
Elizabeth Fot , a loyal servant of Jehovah , also lived in Kant .
She earned her living as a seamstress .
Because she was skilled in her craft , such professionals as doctors and teachers ordered clothes from her .
One of her clients was a woman named Aksamai Sultanalieva , who was married to an official of the public prosecutor’s office .
Aksamai came to Elizabeth for some clothing but asked many questions about the meaning of life and the condition of the dead .

Elizabeth answered her questions straight from the Bible .
Aksamai became a zealous preacher of the good news .
Nikolai Chimpoesh
At about that time , Nikolai Chimpoesh , from Moldova , was appointed a circuit overseer and served as such for almost 30 years .
Not only did Nikolai visit congregations but he also organized the duplication and distribution of our literature .
His activities did not go unnoticed by the authorities .
Hence , Eduard Varter gave Nikolai some encouraging advice : “ When the authorities question you , tell them openly that we get our literature from headquarters in Brooklyn . Look the KGB agent right in the eye .
You have nothing to fear . ” ​ — Matt . 10 : 19 .
Soon after this conversation , Nikolai was summoned to KGB headquarters in Kant .
He related what happened next : “ The agent asked where we got our literature .
I told him we get it from Brooklyn .
He did not know what to say to that .
He just let me go and never called me in again . ”
Such intrepid Witnesses kept on cautiously spreading the good news in my home region of northern Kyrgyzstan .
When the precious truth about Jehovah finally reached my own family in the 1980 ’ s , my wife , Mairambubu , heard it first .
Mairambubu comes from the Naryn Region of Kyrgyzstan .
One day in August 1974 , she visited my sister’s home , which is where we first met .
I liked Mairambubu straight away .

We got married that same day .
Apun Mambetsadykova
In January 1981 when Mairambubu was in a bus on her way to a local market , she overheard the conversation mentioned earlier .
My wife wanted to hear more , so she asked the woman for her name and address .
She gave her name , Apun , but she was cautious because even in the 1980 ’ s , the activities of the Witnesses were banned .
Instead of giving my wife her address , Apun took note of our address .
My wife arrived home excited .
“ I heard wonderful things , ” said Mairambubu .
“ A woman told me that soon people will no longer die . Even wild beasts will be tamed . ”
To me , it sounded like a fairy tale .
“ Let’s wait until she visits to tell us the details , ” I replied .
Apun visited us three months later .
Further visits followed , whereby we met some of the first Witnesses belonging to the Kyrgyz people .
These sisters introduced us to the amazing truths about Jehovah and his purpose for mankind .
They read to us the book From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained .
* And since there was just one copy of this book in Tokmok , we copied it by hand for ourselves .
One of the first things we learned was the prophecy at Genesis 3 : 15 .
This prophecy will be fulfilled through Jesus as God’s Messianic King .
That is an important message that everyone must hear !
All the more reason for us to join in the proclamation .
Soon , Bible truth began to transform our lives .
A Christian brother in Tokmok invited us to a wedding .
My wife and I soon noticed that the Witnesses behaved differently .
There was no alcohol at the wedding , and the festivities were orderly .
This was a big contrast to other weddings we had attended , where guests often got drunk , behaved badly , and used foul language .
We also attended some Christian meetings of the congregation in Tokmok .
These were held in the woods , weather permitting .
The brothers and sisters knew that the police kept a close watch on us , so the brothers posted a lookout .
In winter , we gathered for meetings in a house .
A couple of times , the police came to the house and demanded to know what we were doing .
When Mairambubu and I got baptized in July 1982 in the Chüy River , we had to be cautious .
Brothers arrived in small numbers and assembled in the forest .
We sang a Kingdom song and listened to the baptism talk .
In 1987 a brother asked me to visit an interested person living in the town of Balykchy .
Getting there from our home involved a four - hour journey by train .

After several preaching trips to Balykchy , we discovered widespread interest there .
This was clearly an opportunity to expand our ministry .
Mairambubu and I often traveled to Balykchy .
We stayed there most weekends , went in the ministry , and held Christian meetings .
Demand for our publications rose dramatically .
We carried the publications from Tokmok in a mishok , a sack used to transport potatoes .
Two sacks full of literature per month barely met the demand .
Even on the train to and from Balykchy , we were able to witness to passengers .
In 1995 a congregation was formed in Balykchy ​ — eight years after our first visit to that town .
Those years of traveling between Tokmok and Balykchy cost a lot of money .
Our personal means were limited , so how did we manage ?
A Christian brother regularly gave us money to make up for the shortfall .
Jehovah saw our desire to expand our ministry , and he opened “ the floodgates of the heavens ” to us .
Surely all things are possible with Jehovah !
In 1992 , I was appointed to serve as an elder , the first Kyrgyz elder in the country .
In our home congregation of Tokmok , new avenues of service opened up .
We had numerous Bible studies with young Kyrgyz students at educational institutes .
One of these young people with whom we studied now serves on the Branch Committee , and two others are special pioneers .
We also reached out to help others at our meetings .
In the early 1990 ’ s , our publications as well as the meetings were in the Russian language .
But an increasing number in the congregation spoke Kyrgyz as their mother tongue .
So I interpreted , which helped them grasp the truth more readily .
With my wife and eight of our children in 1989
Mairambubu and I were also kept busy raising our growing family .
We took our children in the preaching work and to the congregation meetings .
Our daughter Gulsayra ​ — then just 12 years old — ​ enjoyed speaking to passersby on the street and telling them about the Bible .
And our children loved memorizing Scripture texts .
In this way our children , and later grandchildren , were very much involved in congregation activities .
Of the 9 children and 11 grandchildren still living , 16 serve Jehovah or attend the meetings with their parents .
The dear brothers and sisters who started Jehovah’s work in our area in the 1950 ’ s would be astounded to see the changes we have experienced .
For one thing , since the 1990 ’ s , we have enjoyed more freedom to preach the good news and to assemble together in large numbers .
With my wife in the ministry
In 1991 my wife and I attended our first - ever convention in Alma - Ata , now known as Almaty , in Kazakhstan .
And in 1993 the brothers in Kyrgyzstan hosted a convention at Spartak Stadium in Bishkek for the first time .
Publishers spent a week cleaning the stadium beforehand .
The director was so impressed that he allowed us to use the facilities without cost .
In 1994 we reached another milestone when the first of our publications was printed in the Kyrgyz language .
Literature is now regularly translated into Kyrgyz by a translation team at the branch office in Bishkek .
Indeed , in 1998 the work of the Witnesses was granted legal recognition in Kyrgyzstan .
The organization has grown , and we now number well over 5,000 publishers .
Today , we have a total of 83 congregations and 25 groups in Chinese , English , Kyrgyz , Russian , Russian Sign Language , Turkish , Uighur , and Uzbek .
All these dear brothers and sisters from different backgrounds serve Jehovah unitedly .
Jehovah made all these remarkable changes possible .
Jehovah also transformed my life .
I grew up in a lowly peasant family and had just five years of schooling .
Yet , Jehovah used me to serve as an elder and to teach precious Bible truths to people who were more educated than I was .
Indeed , Jehovah makes the most unusual things happen .
My own experience moves me to continue loyally testifying about Jehovah , with whom “ all things are possible . ” ​ — Matt . 19 : 26 .
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses but now out of print .
“ May [ God ] grant you to have among yourselves the same mental attitude that Christ Jesus had . ” ​ — ROM .
15 : 5 .
SONGS : 17 , 13
How can we identify a spiritual person ?
What can we learn from exemplary spiritual people ?
Why should we strive to have “ the mind of Christ ” ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) How do many view spirituality ?
( b ) What key questions about spirituality will we consider ?
“ BEING a spiritual person has made me happier , and it has helped me deal successfully with daily trials , ” says a sister in Canada .
A brother in Brazil states , “ Our 23 years of marriage have been very happy ​ — thanks to our efforts to be spiritually - minded . ”
And a brother in the Philippines notes , “ Being a spiritual person has allowed me to have peace of mind , and it has helped me improve in my dealings with brothers from different backgrounds . ”
Expressions like those portray spirituality in a favorable way .

As a result , we may be moved to ask ourselves , ‘ How can I grow as a spiritual person and enjoy more fully the benefits described above ? ’
However , before we answer that , we need to understand clearly what the Bible says about spiritual , or spiritually - minded , people .
In this article , we will answer three key questions .
( 1 ) What does it mean to be a spiritual person ?
( 2 ) What examples will help us to progress in our spirituality ?
( 3 ) How will our effort to have “ the mind of Christ ” help us to be spiritual people ?
How does the Bible’s description of a physical man differ from that of a spiritual man ?
The apostle Paul helps us to understand what a spiritual person is by drawing a contrast between a “ spiritual man ” and “ a physical man . ”
( Read 1 Corinthians 2 : 14 - 16 . )
What is the difference ? The “ physical man ” is described as not accepting “ the things of the spirit of God , for they are foolishness to him ; and he cannot get to know them . ”
On the other hand , “ the spiritual man ” is someone who “ examines all things ” and who has “ the mind of Christ . ”
Paul encourages us to be spiritual people .
In what other ways do physical and spiritual individuals differ ?
4 , 5 .
What are the characteristics of a physical person ?
Consider first the attitude of a physical individual .
The world has a predominant attitude that centers on the flesh .
Paul describes it as “ the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience . ”
This spirit influences most humans to adopt a common attitude ​ — simply follow the crowd .
They are focused on the flesh .
As a result , the majority of them do what feels right in their own eyes and make no effort to live up to God’s standards .
A physical , or fleshly - minded , person is often excessively concerned about prestige and material pursuits or about defending what he feels are his rights .
What else might identify a physical person ?
People who engage in any of “ the works of the flesh ” fall into that category .
Paul’s first letter to the Corinthian congregation identifies a number of other characteristics of those who have a fleshly attitude .
These include : promoting divisions , taking sides , fostering dissensions , taking one another to court , showing a lack of appreciation for headship , and being self - indulgent in food and drink .
When confronted with temptation , the fleshly - minded person weakens and gives in .
Jude spoke of those who would deteriorate even to the point of “ not having spirituality . ” ​ — Jude 18 , 19 .
What identifies a spiritual person ?
What , then , does it mean to be a “ spiritual man ” ?
A spiritual person is inclined toward God , the opposite of the physical person .
Spiritually - minded individuals strive to “ become imitators of God . ”
This means that they make an effort to have Jehovah’s thinking on matters and to look at things from his point of view .
God is very real to them .
In contrast with fleshly - minded individuals , they try to bring all their ways into harmony with Jehovah’s standards .
Rather than focus on fleshly works , the spiritually - minded person endeavors to show “ the fruitage of the spirit . ”
To clarify the expression “ spiritually - minded ” further , think of this comparison : An individual who is skillful in commercial affairs is said to be business - minded .
Similarly , someone who keenly values spiritual or religious interests is called spiritually - minded .
What does the Bible say about spiritually - minded people ?
The Bible speaks highly of spiritually - minded people .
Matthew 5 : 3 says : “ Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need , since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them . ”
Romans 8 : 6 shows the advantage of being spiritually - minded , saying : “ Setting the mind on the flesh means death , but setting the mind on the spirit means life and peace . ”
By focusing on spiritual things , we gain peace with God and with ourselves now and the prospect of everlasting life in the future .



Why is effort needed to develop and maintain spirituality ?
However , we live in a dangerous environment .
Since fleshly attitudes are all around us , we need to put forth real effort to develop spirituality and to guard it once we have it .
If a person loses his spirituality , he creates a moral vacuum and the polluted “ air ” of this world will rush in .
What can help us to prevent that from happening ?
How can we grow spiritually ?
( a ) What can help us to grow spiritually ?
( b ) What examples of spiritual people will we consider ?
A child can become mature by observing his parents and copying their good example .
In like manner , we can grow spiritually by observing and imitating spiritually strong people .
Conversely , fleshly - oriented people serve as warning examples for us .
The Bible contains both types of examples .
But since our goal is to grow as spiritual people , let us take a look at several positive examples of individuals we can imitate .
We will consider the examples of Jacob , Mary , and Jesus .
What can we learn from the example of Jacob ?
( See paragraph 10 )
How did Jacob show himself to be a spiritual man ?
First , take the example of Jacob .
As is true of most of us today , Jacob did not have an easy life .
He had to put up with his fleshly - minded brother , Esau , who intended to kill him .
On top of that , he had to deal with a deceitful father - in - law , who repeatedly tried to exploit him .
Yet , despite being surrounded by “ physical ” men , Jacob was a spiritual man .

He had faith in the promise made to Abraham and devoted himself to caring for the family who would play a special role in the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose .
Jacob’s words and actions reveal that he had God’s standards and will in mind .
For example , when he felt threatened by Esau , Jacob said to God : “ Save me , I pray you . . .
You have said : ‘ I will certainly deal well with you , and I will make your offspring like the grains of sand of the sea . ’ ”
He obviously put faith in Jehovah’s promises to him and his forefathers and wanted to act in harmony with God’s will and purpose .
What can we learn from the example of Mary ?
( See paragraph 11 )
What shows that Mary was a spiritual person ?
Now consider another example , that of Mary .
Why did Jehovah choose Mary to become Jesus ’ mother ?
No doubt because she was a spiritually - minded person .
How do we know that ?
She showed clear evidence of spirituality in her beautiful expressions of praise when she visited the home of her relatives Zechariah and Elizabeth .
( Read Luke 1 : 46 - 55 . )
Mary’s statements show that she had a deep love for God’s Word and was thoroughly familiar with the Hebrew Scriptures .
Note , too , that she and Joseph , although newly married , refrained from sexual relations until Jesus was born .
What does that indicate ?
It shows that both of them were more concerned with Jehovah’s will than with satisfying their personal desires .
As time passed , Mary carefully noted what took place in Jesus ’ life and paid attention to the words of wisdom he spoke .
Furthermore , she “ kept all these sayings in her heart . ”
She was clearly interested in God’s purpose in connection with the Messiah .
Does not Mary’s example help us to think of how we can put God’s will first in our life ?
( a ) In what way did Jesus resemble his Father ?
( b ) How can we imitate Jesus ’ example ?
( See opening picture . )
Yet , of all the people who have lived , who is the most outstanding example of a spiritual person ?
It is Jesus , of course .
Throughout his life and ministry , he showed that he wanted to imitate his Father , Jehovah .
He thought , felt , and acted like Jehovah and lived in harmony with God’s will and standards .
Note , for example , how Jehovah’s feelings of compassion are described by the prophet Isaiah , and compare that description with what the Gospel writer Mark reports about Jesus ’ feelings .
( Read Isaiah 63 : 9 ; Mark 6 : 34 . )
Are we like Jesus , ever ready to show compassionate concern when we meet people who need help ?
In addition , Jesus devoted himself to the work of preaching and teaching the good news .
All such feelings and actions are marks of a spiritual person .
13 , 14 . ( a ) What can we learn from modern - day examples of spiritually - minded people ?
( b ) Relate an example .
Aside from Scriptural examples , there are many modern - day examples of spiritually - minded individuals who have made great progress in reflecting a Christlike personality .
Perhaps you have noticed their zeal in the ministry , their outstanding hospitality , their compassion , or other fine qualities .
They , like us , have battled weaknesses and imperfections while trying to develop those godly qualities .
Rachel , a sister in Brazil , says : “ I loved to follow the world’s fashions .
As a result , I did not dress very modestly .
But learning the truth moved me to make the needed effort to be a spiritual person .
Making changes was not easy , but I became happier and found real purpose in life . ”
Reylene , from the Philippines , had a different challenge .
She focused on pursuing higher education and good employment in order to get ahead in life .
She says : “ My spiritual goals started to fade .
But I began to realize that something was missing in my life , something far more important than my job .
As a result , I redirected my focus to serving Jehovah . ”
Since then , Reylene has been a living example of putting faith in Jehovah’s promise found at Matthew 6 : 33 , 34 .
She says : “ I know for sure that Jehovah will take care of me ! ”
Perhaps you know of similar examples in your congregation .
Are we not moved to imitate such faithful ones as they follow the Christ ? ​ — 1 Cor . 11 : 1 ; 2 Thess . 3 : 7 .
15 , 16 . ( a ) To be like Christ , what do we need to do ?
( b ) How can we expose our mind to “ the mind of Christ ” ?
How can we personally imitate Christ ?
The Bible at 1 Corinthians 2 : 16 speaks of having “ the mind of Christ . ”
And Romans 15 : 5 refers to having “ the same mental attitude that Christ Jesus had . ”
Therefore , to be like Christ , we need to know his pattern of thinking and the full range of his personality .
Then we need to follow in his footsteps .
Jesus ’ mind is focused on his relationship with God .
So being like Jesus makes us more like Jehovah .
For these reasons , it becomes clear how important it is to learn to think as Jesus does .
How can we do this ?
Jesus ’ disciples saw his miracles , heard his discourses , watched how he dealt with all kinds of people , and observed how he applied godly principles .
They said : “ We are witnesses of all the things he did . ”
We , however , cannot observe him directly .
But Jehovah has lovingly provided the Gospel accounts that can make Jesus ’ personality come alive in our mind .
By reading and meditating on the Bible books of Matthew , Mark , Luke , and John , we expose our mind to Christ’s mind .
We thus can “ follow his steps closely ” and “ arm [ ourselves ] with the same mental disposition ” as Christ had . ​ — 1 Pet .
2 : 21 ; 4 : 1 .
How will thinking like Christ help us ?
How will learning to think like Christ help us ?
Just as nourishing food strengthens the physical body , feeding our mind on Christ’s thinking fortifies our spirituality . Gradually , we come to know what Christ would do in any situation .
This , in turn , helps us to make decisions that leave us with a clean conscience and God’s approval .
Do you not agree that these benefits give us good reason to “ put on the Lord Jesus Christ ” ? ​ — Rom .
13 : 14 .
What have you learned from this discussion on being a spiritual person ?
We have considered what it means to be a spiritual person .
We have also seen that we can learn from good examples of spiritual people .
Finally , we have learned how having “ the mind of Christ ” helps us to grow as a spiritual person .
However , there are several other aspects of spirituality that we should consider .
For example , how can we analyze the strength of our own spirituality ?
What more can we do to cultivate it ?
And how will our spirituality impact our daily life ?
The next article will help to answer these questions .
“ Keep walking by spirit . ” ​ — GAL .
5 : 16 .
SONGS : 22 , 75
What might we consider when analyzing our spirituality ?
What do we need to do to move forward as a spiritual person ?
How will having the mind of Christ affect your daily life ?
1 , 2 .
What did one brother find lacking with regard to his spiritual condition , and what did he do about it ?
ROBERT got baptized as a teenager , but he did not really take the truth seriously .
He says : “ I never did anything wrong , but I was just going through the motions . I looked spiritually strong , being at all the meetings and serving as an auxiliary pioneer a few times a year .
But something was missing . ”
Robert himself did not perceive what was wrong until later when he got married .
He and his wife began passing time by quizzing each other on Bible subjects .
His wife , a spiritually strong person , had no problem answering the questions , but Robert found himself constantly embarrassed , not knowing what to say .
He says : “ It was as if I knew nothing .

I thought to myself , ‘ If I am going to be my wife’s spiritual head , I have to do something . ’ ”
And Robert did .
He says : “ I studied the Bible and studied and studied some more , and the pieces started to fit together .
I got understanding and , most important , developed a close relationship with Jehovah . ”
( a ) What can we learn from Robert’s experience ?
( b ) What key points will we now discuss ?
We can learn important lessons from Robert’s experience .
We may have some Bible knowledge and may regularly associate with the Christian congregation , but these things in themselves do not necessarily make us into a spiritual person .
Or we may have already made progress , but when we examine ourselves further , we find that we can still improve our spirituality .
To help us to continue progressing , we will answer three key questions in this article : ( 1 ) What will help us to analyze the true state of our spirituality ?
( 2 ) How can we cultivate spirituality and keep growing as a spiritual person ?
( 3 ) How can strong spirituality help us in our daily life ?
To whom does the counsel found at Ephesians 4 : 23 , 24 apply ?
When we became servants of God , we made a transformation .
This change affected every area of our life .
And it was not over when we got baptized . We are told to “ continue to be made new in [ our ] dominant mental attitude . ”
Since we are not perfect , we all need to continue making changes .
Even longtime servants of Jehovah need to maintain their spirituality . ​ — Phil .
3 : 12 , 13 .
What questions can help us analyze ourselves ?
To improve and maintain our spirituality , we need to analyze ourselves honestly .
Whether we are young or old , we can ask ourselves these questions : ‘ Do I notice changes in myself that indicate that I am moving toward becoming a spiritually - minded person ?
Is my personality becoming Christlike ?
What do my disposition and conduct at Christian meetings reveal about the depth of my spirituality ?
What do my conversations show about my desires ?
What do my study habits , dress and grooming , or reaction to counsel reveal about me ?
How do I react when faced with temptations ?
Have I progressed beyond basics to maturity , becoming full - grown as a Christian ? ’
Thinking about our answers to these questions can help us measure our spiritual progress .
To analyze the state of our spirituality , what else may be needed ?
To analyze the state of our spirituality , we may at times need help from others .
The apostle Paul pointed out that the fleshly person cannot see the wrongness of his position before God .
On the other hand , the spiritual person understands God’s viewpoint as well as the erroneous course of the physical man .
Elders who have the mind of Christ often see early warning signs of fleshly thinking .
If they bring these to our attention , do we accept and apply their counsel ?
By doing so , we give evidence of our desire to develop our spirituality . ​ — Eccl . 7 : 5 , 9 .
Why is having Bible knowledge not enough to become a spiritually - minded person ?
Keep in mind that having knowledge of the Bible is not enough to become a spiritually - minded person .
Ancient King Solomon had a lot of knowledge about Jehovah’s ways . His sayings later became part of the Bible .
But in the end , he failed to stay faithful to Jehovah as a spiritual man .
So in addition to Bible knowledge , what is needed ? We need to continue to make spiritual progress .
But how do we do so ?
8 , 9 . ( a ) What will help us to develop spiritual stability ?
( b ) What is our goal when we study and meditate ?
( See opening picture . )
Paul urged first - century Christians to “ press on to maturity . ”
In order to apply Paul’s counsel today , what steps can we take ?
One important step is to study the publication “ Keep Yourselves in God’s Love . ”
Completing your study of that book will help you to see how to apply Bible principles in your life .
If you have already finished studying that book , can you move on to other study materials that can help you to stabilize your faith ?
Do you prayerfully meditate on how you can apply in your life what you are studying ?
Keep in mind that as we study and meditate , we should do so with the goal of developing a heartfelt desire to please Jehovah and obey his laws .
At the same time , we work to reject things that will hinder our spiritual growth . ​ — Titus 2 : 11 , 12 .
What can young people do to cultivate spirituality ?
If you are a youth , do you have clear spiritual goals ?
When attending circuit assemblies , a brother who serves at Bethel has made it his custom to speak with baptism candidates before the program .
Many candidates are youths .
The brother asks them what spiritual goals they have .
Many give answers that reveal that they have a clear vision of what they want to do to serve Jehovah ​ — perhaps by entering some form of full - time service or by serving where there is a greater need for Kingdom proclaimers .
Occasionally , however , there are youths who do not seem to have an answer .
Might that indicate that they have not yet resolved in their heart that they should have clear spiritual goals ?
As a youth , ask yourself : ‘ Am I participating in spiritual activities just because my parents expect me to ?
Am I drawing closer to God by nurturing a personal relationship with him ? ’
Of course , the counsel to have spiritual goals applies not just to youths .
Having such goals will help all of us as Jehovah’s servants to deepen our spirituality . ​ — Eccl .
12 : 1 , 13 .
( a ) To make real spiritual progress , what do we need to do ?
( b ) What Bible example can we imitate ?
Once we have identified areas for improvement , we need to take positive steps that will help us move forward .
Becoming a spiritual person is very important . In fact , it is a life - and - death matter .
However , for us to be spiritually mature does not mean to be perfect .
Jehovah’s spirit can help us to make the needed progress .
Still , we do need to put forth effort .
In commenting on Luke 13 : 24 , John Barr , who served as a member of the Governing Body , pointed out some years ago , “ Many fail because they are not diligent enough to grow mighty . ”
We need to be like Jacob , who did not give up wrestling with an angel until he got a blessing .
Although Bible study can be enjoyable , we should not expect the Bible to read like a novel that is written just to entertain .
We need to work at finding spiritual gems that will help us .
Study God’s Word diligently , and meditate on what you read
Zealously apply the things you learn
Keep your mind and heart open to the influence of the holy spirit
Gratefully accept help from others
12 , 13 . ( a ) What will help us to apply Romans 15 : 5 ?
( b ) How can the apostle Peter’s example and counsel help us ?
( c ) What can you do to cultivate spirituality ?
( See the box “ Steps You Can Take to Progress Spiritually . ” )
As we work at cultivating spirituality , holy spirit will give us the power to transform our mind .
With the spirit’s help , we can gradually begin to think more and more as Christ did .
Additionally , it will help us root out fleshly desires and cultivate qualities pleasing to God .
If we find that our mind pushes us toward materialistic thinking or fleshly desires , we should not give up .
Keep asking for the spirit , and Jehovah will help you to redirect your mental attitude to focus on proper things .
Remember the apostle Peter .
Several times in his life , he did not respond as a spiritual man should .
But he did not give up .
Gradually , with Jehovah’s help , Peter developed Christlike thinking .
We can do the same .
Peter , in fact , later spelled out specific things we can work on .
( Read 2 Peter 1 : 5 - 8 . )
As we “ put forth all earnest effort ” to develop such qualities as self - control , endurance , and brotherly affection , we will be helped to continue to move ahead as spiritually - minded individuals .
Each day , why not ask yourself , ‛ What can I work on today to progress spiritually ? ’
How will being spiritually - minded affect our life ?
Our Christlike thinking will influence our speech , our conduct at work or in school , and the decisions we make each day .

Those decisions will reveal that we strive to be followers of Christ .
As spiritual people , we want nothing to jeopardize our relationship with our heavenly Father .
When we are confronted with temptations , our Christlike attitude will move us to push them away .

When making decisions , we will stop and ponder over these questions : ‛ What Bible principles will help me decide ?
What would Christ do in this situation ?
What decision will please Jehovah ? ’
To train ourselves to think this way , let us take a look at a few sample situations .
In each example , we will identify a Scriptural principle that can help us make a wise decision .
15 , 16 .
Give examples of how Christlike thinking helps us when making decisions about ( a ) selecting a marriage mate . ( b ) choosing our associations .
Selecting a marriage mate .
The Scriptural principle is found at 2 Corinthians 6 : 14 , 15 .
( Read . )
Paul’s words clearly state that a spiritual person cannot enjoy complete harmony with a physical person .
How can this be applied to choosing a marriage mate ?
Associations .
Note the Scriptural principle found at 1 Corinthians 15 : 33 .
( Read . )
A godly person will not mix with those who could endanger his spirituality .
What questions could help you to make practical application ?
For example , how does this apply to social networking ? Or what should you do if invited to play online games with strangers ?
Will my decisions help me to grow spiritually ?
( See paragraph 17 )
17 - 19 .
How will having a spiritual viewpoint help you ( a ) to avoid vain pursuits ?
( b ) to set goals in life ?
( c ) to deal with disputes ?
Activities that hinder spiritual growth .
Paul’s words to fellow Christians contain a warning .
( Read Hebrews 6 : 1 . )
What are the “ dead works ” that we should avoid ?
Any pursuits that are spiritually dead , vain , or fruitless .
This principle can help us with many questions that could arise in our life , such as : ‘ Does this activity fall in the category of fleshly works ?
Should I get involved in this money - making proposal ?
Why should I not join worldly reform movements ? ’
Will my decisions help me to set spiritual goals ?
( See paragraph 18 )
Spiritual goals .
Jesus ’ words spoken in the Sermon on the Mount give us clear guidance about setting goals .
A spiritual person pursues spiritually oriented goals .
Keeping this principle in mind helps us answer such questions as : ‘ Should I pursue plans for an advanced education ?
Should I accept a certain job offer ? ’
Will my decisions help me to “ be peaceable ” ?
( See paragraph 19 )
Disputes .
How does Paul’s counsel to the congregation in Rome help us in dealing with disputes ?
As followers of Christ , we work to “ be peaceable with all men . ”
When disputes arise , how do we react ?
Do we find it difficult to yield , or are we known as those who are “ making peace ” ? ​ — Jas .
3 : 18 .
Why do you want to move forward spiritually ?
These are just a few examples to show how reflecting on godly principles can help us make decisions that harmonize with what is expected of a spiritual person .
Being spiritually - minded can help us to make our daily life happier and more satisfying .
Robert , whose experience was considered at the beginning of this article , says : “ After I developed a real relationship with Jehovah , I was a better husband and a better father .
I was content and happy . ”
We can enjoy similar blessings if we make spiritual progress our priority .
As spiritual people , we will enjoy a more satisfying life now and “ the real life ” to come . ​ — 1 Tim . 6 : 19 .
FROM OUR ARCHIVES
AS THE boat steamed up the Belfast Lough , a sea inlet , the little cluster of passengers standing on deck caught sight of green hills bathed in early morning light .
It was May 1910 .
For one man in their midst , Charles T .

Russell , this was the fifth trip to Ireland .
Looming before Brother Russell were two massive ocean liners under construction , the ill - fated Titanic and her sister ship Olympic .
* Beyond the shipyard , a dozen Bible Students stood on the quay , awaiting his arrival .
Some 20 years earlier , seeking the best way to spread the good news worldwide , Brother Russell had decided to make a series of tours outside of America .
His first tour started with Ireland , in July 1891 .
Aboard the City of Chicago , he viewed the sunset over the approaching coastline at Queenstown and may well have remembered his parents ’ description of their homeland .

As Brother Russell and his traveling companions passed through tidy towns and beautiful countryside , they realized that here was a field “ ready and waiting to be harvested . ”
Brother Russell visited Ireland seven times in all .
The interest stirred on the first trip evidently led to hundreds , sometimes thousands , turning out to hear him speak on later visits .
By his second trip , in May 1903 , public meetings in Belfast and Dublin were being advertised in local newspapers .
Russell recounted that the “ audiences were very attentive ” to the subject “ The Oath - Bound Promise ” about Abraham’s faith and the future blessings for mankind .
Because of the considerable interest found there , Ireland was also included in Russell’s third European trip .
Five brothers greeted him as he stepped onto the dock at Belfast one April morning in 1908 .
The advertised public talk , “ The Overthrow of Satan’s Empire , ” drew an “ intelligent audience of about 300 ” later that evening .
One objector in their midst was swiftly handled by skillful use of the Scriptures .
In Dublin a more determined opposer ​ — Mr .
O’Connor , secretary of the YMCA ​ — attempted to turn the audience of more than 1,000 against the Bible Students .
What happened ?
Let us go back in time and reconstruct in our minds what could well have happened at that event .
A man interested in finding Bible truth decides to attend a public talk advertised in The Irish Times .
He barely manages to find a seat in the packed auditorium .
The man pays rapt attention to the white - haired , bearded speaker wearing a long black coat .
As the speaker delivers his lecture , he moves across the platform , gesturing freely , methodically building one scripture on another and opening up the man’s ears of understanding to Bible truths .
Even without the use of sound equipment , the speaker’s voice carries to every part of the hall , holding the audience’s attention for one and a half hours .
Then , in a question - and - answer session , he is challenged by O’Connor and friends but ably defends the message with the Bible .
The audience applaud their approval .
When the dust settles , the interested man approaches the brothers to learn more .
According to eyewitness accounts , many learned the truth in this way .
Leaving New York in May 1909 on the Mauretania for his fourth visit , Brother Russell took along a stenographer , Brother Huntsinger , so that the time traveling across the ocean could be used to dictate Watch Tower articles .


Brother Russell’s public talk in Belfast drew 450 locals , about 100 of whom had to stand because of a lack of room .
Brother C .
T .
Russell aboard the Lusitania
The fifth trip , mentioned at the outset , followed the same pattern .

After the public talk in Dublin , a renowned theologian brought along by O’Connor received Scriptural answers to his questions , much to the audience’s enjoyment .
On the next day , the travelers caught the fast mail boat to Liverpool and boarded the famed Lusitania for New York .
*
Public talk advertised in The Irish Times , May 20 , 1910
Advertised public talks were also featured during Brother Russell’s sixth and seventh trips , in 1911 .

In the spring , 20 Bible Students in Belfast hosted 2,000 , who heard the talk “ Hereafter . ”
O’Connor showed up in Dublin with yet another minister asking questions , but the audience applauded the Scriptural replies .


Autumn of the same year saw other towns visited , with good attendances .
O’Connor plus 100 rowdies attempted to disrupt the Dublin meeting once more , but the audience enthusiastically supported the speaker .
Although Brother Russell took the lead in presenting public talks at that time , he recognized that “ no man is indispensable , ” since “ this is not man’s work ; it’s God’s work . ”
Advertised public talks ​ — forerunner of the Public Meeting — ​ provided excellent opportunities to present Scriptural truths . The result ?
Public talks helped spread the good news , and congregations sprang up in numerous cities throughout Ireland . ​ — From our archives in Britain .
Within two years the Titanic sank .
The Lusitania was torpedoed off the southern coast of Ireland in May 1915 .

Did Jacob become an ancestor of the Messiah as a result of his purchasing Esau’s rights as firstborn ?
We have at times made comments to that effect .
That seemed to agree with what we read at Hebrews 12 : 16 .
That verse says that Esau did “ not appreciate sacred things ” and “ gave up [ to Jacob the ] rights as firstborn in exchange for one meal . ”
This appeared to suggest that when Jacob gained the “ rights as firstborn , ” he also came in line to be an ancestor to the Messiah . ​ — Matt .
1 : 2 , 16 ; Luke 3 : 23 , 34 .
However , a review of Bible accounts shows that a man did not need to be a firstborn son to be an ancestor of the Messiah .
Consider some of the evidence :
Of the sons of Jacob ( Israel ) , his firstborn by Leah was Reuben .
Later , Jacob’s first son by his favored wife , Rachel , was Joseph .
When Reuben became guilty of misconduct , the right of firstborn passed to Joseph .

Still , the Messianic line came down through neither Reuben nor Joseph .
It was through Judah , Jacob’s fourth son by Leah . ​ — Gen .
49 : 10 .
Luke 3 : 32 lists five later links in the line leading to the Messiah .
Each man seems to have been a firstborn .
Thus Boaz fathered Obed , whose son was Jesse . ​ — Ruth 4 : 17 , 20 - 22 ; 1 Chron .
2 : 10 - 12 .
However , Jesse’s son David was not a firstborn .
He was the last of eight sons .
Yet the line of the Messiah was through David .
Similarly , the next link was Solomon , though he was not David’s firstborn . ​ — 2 Sam .
3 : 2 - 5 .

This is not to say that being firstborn was of no importance .
The firstborn son held an honored position and often became the next head of the household .
He was also the son who inherited a double portion of property . ​ — Gen .
43 : 33 ; Deut .
21 : 17 ; Josh .
17 : 1 .
But the right of firstborn could be transferred .
Abraham dismissed Ishmael , passing the firstborn’s right to Isaac .
And as noted , the firstborn’s right was transferred from Reuben to Joseph .
Now let us return to Hebrews 12 : 16 , which reads : “ Watch that among you there is no one who is sexually immoral nor anyone who does not appreciate sacred things , like Esau , who gave up his rights as firstborn in exchange for one meal . ”
What point was being made ?
The apostle Paul was not here discussing the ancestry of the Messiah .

He had just urged Christians to ‘ make straight paths for their feet . ’
Thus they would not ‘ fail to obtain the undeserved kindness of God , ’ which sadly could happen if they engaged in sexual immorality .
If they did that , they would be like Esau .
He failed to “ appreciate sacred things , ” and he literally gave in to what was profane .
Esau lived in patriarchal times , and he may even occasionally have had the privilege of offering sacrifices .
But with his fleshly bent of mind , Esau gave away all such privileges for a bowl of stew .
He may have wanted to avoid the suffering foretold to come on Abraham’s offspring .
Esau also showed himself inclined toward the profane , lacking appreciation for sacred things , by marrying two pagan women , to his parents ’ grief .

What a contrast he was to Jacob , who made sure to marry a worshipper of the true God ! ​ — Gen .
28 : 6 , 7 ; 29 : 10 - 12 , 18 .
Consequently , what can we conclude about the line of descent leading to Jesus , the Messiah ?
Sometimes that line passed to and through the firstborn son ​ — but not always .
The Jews recognized this and accepted it , as when they admitted that the Christ was to descend through David , Jesse’s last son . ​ — Matt .
22 : 42 .
3 Baptism ​ — A Requirement for Christians
8 Parents , Are You Helping Your Child Progress to Baptism ?
What should be our goal when we conduct a Bible study ?
Why would it be a mistake to delay baptism ?
What has caused some Christian parents to encourage their children to postpone getting baptized ?
These questions and others will be addressed in these two articles .
13 Questions From Readers
14 The Delightful Course of Hospitality ​ — So Needed !
The apostle Peter urged Christians in the first century : “ Be hospitable to one another . ”
Why is this counsel so needed in our day ?
What are some practical ways that we can follow it ?
And how can we be good guests ?
This article will consider these questions .
19 Life Story ​ — Jehovah Has Never Failed Me !
23 Discipline ​ — Evidence of God’s Love
28 “ Listen to Discipline and Become Wise ”
These two articles will help us to appreciate more fully the depth of God’s love for us as reflected in his fatherly discipline .
How , though , does God discipline us ?
How should we respond to his discipline ?
And how can we cultivate self - discipline ?
Find the answers in these articles .
“ Why are you delaying ?
Rise , get baptized . ” ​ — ACTS 22 : 16 .
SONGS : 51 , 135
Colossians 1 : 9 , 10
Ecclesiastes 12 : 1
James 4 : 17
What do Christian parents want to be sure of before their children get baptized ?
“ FOR months I kept telling Dad and Mom that I wanted to be baptized , and they often talked to me about it .
They wanted to make sure I knew how serious my decision was .
On December 31 , 1934 , the day came for this momentous event in my life . ”
Blossom Brandt thus described events surrounding her decision to get baptized .
Today , Christian parents have a similar interest in helping their children make wise decisions . Postponing baptism or delaying it needlessly could invite spiritual problems .
Wisely , however , parents want to be sure that before their children get baptized , they are ready to shoulder the responsibility of Christian discipleship .
( a ) Why have some circuit overseers expressed concern ?
( b ) What will we consider in this article ?
Some circuit overseers have expressed concern because they meet young ones in their late teens and early 20 ’ s who have grown up in Christian households but who have yet to get baptized .
In most cases , these young ones attend congregation meetings and share in the ministry . They view themselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses .
Yet , for some reason they hold back from dedicating their lives to Jehovah and getting baptized .
What could be the reason for this ?
In some cases , parents have encouraged them to delay baptism .
In this article , we will consider four concerns that have hindered some Christian parents from helping their children progress to baptism .
Blossom’s parents had what concern ?
Blossom’s parents , mentioned in the first paragraph , were understandably concerned whether their daughter was old enough to grasp the significance and seriousness of baptism .
How can parents know if a child is in a position to make a valid dedication ?
How can Jesus ’ command found at Matthew 28 : 19 , 20 help parents as they teach their children ?
Read Matthew 28 : 19 , 20 .
As discussed in the preceding article , the Bible does not specify an age at which a person should get baptized .
However , parents can benefit from reflecting on what it means to make a disciple .
The Greek word translated “ make disciples ” at Matthew 28 : 19 has the sense of teaching with the intent of making pupils , or disciples .
A disciple is one who learns and understands Jesus ’ teachings and who is determined to observe them .
Thus , the goal of all Christian parents should be to teach their children from infancy with the intention of helping them become baptized disciples of Christ .
Granted , an infant would not qualify for baptism .

However , the Bible shows that even relatively young children can grasp and appreciate Bible truths .
5 , 6 . ( a ) The Bible’s description of Timothy leads us to what conclusion about his baptism ?
( b ) How can discerning parents effectively assist their children ?
Timothy was a disciple who made the truth his own at a young age .
The apostle Paul stated that Timothy had learned Scriptural truths from infancy .
Even though Timothy grew up in a religiously divided household , his Jewish mother and grandmother cultivated in him an appreciation for the Scriptures , as the Jews understood them .
As a result , his faith was unshakable .
By the time he was in his late teens or early 20 ’ s , Timothy was a Christian disciple who could be considered for special privileges in the congregation . ​ — Acts 16 : 1 - 3 .
Of course , each child is unique ; not all children become mature at the same rate or at the same point in life .
Some have a good measure of mental and emotional maturity at a young age and express a desire to get baptized .
Others may not be ready for baptism until they are a bit older .
Thus , discerning parents do not pressure their children to get baptized .
Rather , they assist each child to make spiritual advancement in keeping with his or her own growth and progress .
Parents can rejoice when a child takes to heart the thought behind Proverbs 27 : 11 .
( Read . )
However , they should never lose sight of their goal ​ — to have their children become Christian disciples .
With that in mind , parents will want to consider the question , ‘ Does my child have sufficient knowledge to make a dedication to God and get baptized ? ’
Does someone who wants to get baptized need to have an exhaustive knowledge of the Bible ?
Explain .
It is fitting that as teachers in the family , parents want their children to gain a solid foundation of knowledge on which a dedication may be based .
Even so , an exhaustive knowledge is not required before a person can make a dedication to God and get baptized .
After baptism , all disciples should keep on growing in accurate knowledge .
( Read Colossians 1 : 9 , 10 . )
So how much knowledge is initially required ?
8 , 9 .
What lessons can we learn from the account about Paul and the jailer ?
The experience of a family in the first century offers parents some insight .
While on his second missionary tour , about 50 C.E . , Paul visited Philippi .
While there , he and his companion Silas were arrested on false charges and thrown in jail .
During the night , an earthquake shook the foundations of the jail and opened all the doors .
The jailer , fearing that the prisoners had escaped , was on the verge of committing suicide when Paul called out to him .
Paul and Silas were able to give a fine witness to the jailer and his family .
Their appreciation for the truths they were learning about Jesus prompted them to take what step ?
They got baptized without delay .

What can we learn from this account ?
According to custom , the jailer may have been a retired army veteran .
He was not familiar with the Scriptures .
So to gain a solid foundation of Scriptural knowledge , he needed to learn basic Bible truths , understand what it means to be one of God’s servants , and be determined to obey Jesus ’ teachings .
In a relatively brief time , his knowledge of basic Scriptural truths and his appreciation of them prompted him to get baptized .
No doubt he continued to add to his knowledge after his baptism .
With this example in mind , what can you do when your child expresses a heartfelt appreciation for basic Scriptural teachings , including the meaning and significance of dedication and baptism ?
You Christian parents may conclude that he can contact the congregation elders to see if he meets the qualifications to get baptized .
* Like other baptized disciples , he will continue to increase in knowledge of Jehovah’s purpose throughout his life , even for all eternity . ​ — Rom .
11 : 33 , 34 .
10 , 11 . ( a ) What have some parents concluded ?
( b ) What should be a parent’s first concern ?
Some parents have concluded that it would be best for their son or daughter to delay baptism in order first to obtain some advanced education and become secure in a career .
Such reasoning may be well - intentioned , but will it help their child to achieve genuine success ?
More important , is it in harmony with the Scriptures ?
What course does Jehovah’s Word encourage ? ​ — Read Ecclesiastes 12 : 1 .
It is important to remember that this world and all its components are opposed to Jehovah’s interests and thinking .
A close relationship with Jehovah is a child’s best defense against Satan , his world , and its ungodly thinking .
For a parent to place high priority on secular pursuits could confuse a child and jeopardize his best interests .
Would loving Christian parents really want this world to shape their child’s view of success ?
The fact is , we find true joy and success only when we give Jehovah first place in our lives . ​ — Read Psalm 1 : 2 , 3 .
Why have some parents wanted their child to postpone baptism ?
In explaining her reasons for discouraging her daughter from getting baptized , one Christian mother stated , “ I am ashamed to say that the major reason was the disfellowshipping arrangement . ”
Like that sister , some parents have reasoned that it is better for their child to postpone baptism until he has outgrown the childish tendency to behave foolishly .
They may conclude , ‘ As long as my child is not baptized , he cannot be disfellowshipped . ’
Why is this deceptive reasoning ? ​ — Jas . 1 : 22 .
Does delaying baptism make one less accountable to Jehovah ?
Explain .
Understandably , Christian parents would not want their child to get baptized before being mature enough to make a valid dedication .
However , it would be a mistake to conclude that by not being baptized , a child is not accountable to Jehovah .
Why is that ?
Accountability to Jehovah is not founded on the act of getting baptized .
Rather , a child is accountable to God when the child knows what is right and what is wrong in Jehovah’s eyes .
( Read James 4 : 17 . )
Thus , rather than discourage a child from getting baptized , wise parents work hard to set the right example .
They want to cultivate in their child from infancy a heartfelt appreciation for Jehovah’s elevated moral standards .
Such appreciation is the best protection , for your child will be motivated to hold to Jehovah’s righteous way . ​ — Isa . 35 : 8 .
How can the elders reinforce the efforts of parents who are helping their children progress to baptism ?
As spiritual shepherds , congregation elders can reinforce parents ’ efforts by speaking positively about spiritual goals .
One sister who served as a pioneer for more than 70 years recalled the impact of her conversation with Brother Charles T .
Russell when she was only six years old .
She related , “ He took 15 minutes with me to discuss my spiritual goals . ”

Yes , positive words and encouragement can have a long - lasting effect .
Elders can also include parents and their children in Kingdom Hall projects , giving tasks to youths in keeping with their age and abilities .

What are some ways that others in the congregation can encourage young ones ?
Members of the congregation can help by demonstrating appropriate personal interest in young ones .
This would include being alert to indications of spiritual progress .
Did a youth give a heartfelt , well - thought - out comment or share in a part on the midweek meeting program ?
Has a youth successfully faced a test of integrity or taken advantage of an opportunity to give a witness at school ?
Be quick to offer sincere commendation .
What about making it a point ​ — before or after a meeting — ​ to talk with a young person , manifesting your genuine interest ?
In these ways and others , young ones can be made to realize that they are part of “ the great congregation . ” ​ — Ps .
35 : 18 .
16 , 17 . ( a ) How does baptism relate to one’s future life prospects ?
( b ) What joy do all Christian parents strive for ?
( See opening picture . )
Bringing up a child in “ the discipline and admonition of Jehovah ” is one of the greatest privileges a Christian parent can have .
Unlike children in the ancient nation of Israel , the children of Christian parents are not born as part of a people dedicated to Jehovah .
Moreover , love for God and for truth is not inherited .

From the day of their child’s birth , parents should have the intent to make a disciple , assisting their child to become a dedicated , baptized servant of Jehovah . What could be more important ?
After all , it is each individual’s dedication , baptism , and faithful service to God that will bring him in line for being marked for salvation during the coming great tribulation . ​ — Matt . 24 : 13 .
Parents should have the goal of helping their child become a disciple ( See paragraphs 16 , 17 )
When Blossom Brandt decided that she wanted to get baptized , her God - fearing parents wanted to be sure that she was ready to take the most important step of her life .
Once they were certain that she was ready , they supported her decision .
On the night before her baptism , her father did a beautiful thing .
Blossom related : “ He had all of us get on our knees , and he offered a prayer .
He told Jehovah that he was so happy about his little girl’s decision to dedicate her life to Him . ”
More than 60 years later , Blossom stated : “ You can be sure , in all the ages to come , I’ll never forget that night ! ”
May you parents experience the joy and satisfaction that result from seeing your children become dedicated , baptized servants of Jehovah .
Parents can review with their child the helpful information in Questions Young People Ask ​ — Answers That Work , Volume 2 , pp . 304 - 310 .
See also the “ Question Box ” in Our Kingdom Ministry , April 2011 , p . 2 .
“ Baptism . . . is also now saving you . ” ​ — 1 PET . 3 : 21 .
SONGS : 52 , 41
1 Peter 3 : 20 , 21
Matthew 28 : 19 , 20
Acts 22 : 16
1 , 2 . ( a ) How do some Christian parents respond when their child asks to get baptized ?
( b ) Why are baptism candidates asked if they have made a dedication to Jehovah ?
( See opening picture . )
AS HER Christian parents looked on , a young girl , whom we will call Maria , stood up with the other baptism candidates .
In a loud , clear voice , she answered two questions that the speaker posed .
Shortly afterward , she got baptized .
Maria’s parents were proud of their daughter’s decision to make an unreserved dedication to Jehovah and to get baptized .
Even so , earlier her mother had some lingering questions . She had asked herself : ‘ Is Maria too young to get baptized ?
Does she really understand the seriousness of what she is doing ?
Would it be better to have her wait before getting baptized ? ’
These are questions that many loving parents ask themselves when a child expresses the desire to get baptized .
After all , dedication and baptism are the most important steps in a Christian’s life . ​ — See the box “ Have You Dedicated Yourself to Jehovah ? ”
3 , 4 . ( a ) How did the apostle Peter illustrate the importance of baptism ?
( b ) Why can baptism be likened to constructing the ark in Noah’s day ?
In discussing baptism , the apostle Peter referred to Noah’s constructing of the ark : “ Baptism , which corresponds to this , is also now saving you . ”
( Read 1 Peter 3 : 20 , 21 . )
The ark was a physical structure that provided undeniable visible evidence that Noah was devoted to the doing of God’s will .
Noah faithfully fulfilled the work assignment that Jehovah had given him .
Yes , visible acts of faith led to the preservation of Noah and his family through the Flood .
What is the point of Peter’s illustration ?
Just as the ark amounted to evidence of Noah’s faith , baptism before onlookers provides visible evidence .
What does it show ? That a Christian disciple has dedicated himself to Jehovah on the basis of faith in the resurrected Christ .
Like Noah , dedicated disciples obediently carry on in the work that God has assigned them to do .
Just as Noah was preserved through the Flood , loyal baptized ones will be preserved when the present wicked world meets its end .
This makes dedication and baptism very important .
A person who needlessly delays getting baptized endangers his prospects for everlasting life .
What will we consider in this article ?
In view of how serious baptism is , three questions deserve our attention .
What does the Bible say about baptism ? What steps must a person take before getting baptized ?
Why should a Christian teacher have the importance of baptism clearly in mind when teaching his child or another Bible student ?
6 , 7 . ( a ) Explain the significance of John’s baptism . ( b ) What unique baptism did John perform ?
We first read of baptism in the Bible in reference to that performed by John the Baptist .
Those submitting to John’s baptism did so as evidence of their repentance over sins against the Mosaic Law .
It is noteworthy , however , that the most important baptism that John performed had nothing to do with repentance .
John had the unique privilege of baptizing Jesus , the perfect human Son of God .

Jesus was without sin , so he did not need to repent .
His baptism symbolized the presenting of himself to do God’s will . ​ — Heb .

10 : 7 .
During the course of Jesus ’ earthly ministry , his disciples also performed baptisms .
Like those performed by John , these baptisms symbolized the individuals ’ repentance over sins against the Mosaic Law .
However , after Jesus ’ death and resurrection , baptism would take on a much different meaning for his followers .
( a ) After his resurrection , Jesus gave what command to his followers ?
( b ) Explain the significance of Christian baptism .
In 33 C.E . , the resurrected Jesus appeared to a crowd of more than 500 men , women , and possibly even children .
It may have been on that occasion that he said : “ Go , therefore , and make disciples of people of all the nations , baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit , teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you . ”
Yes , it seems that hundreds of his followers were present when Jesus gave the commission to make disciples .
Jesus thus revealed that baptism would be a requirement for those who accept the yoke of Christian discipleship .
Anyone who wished to serve God acceptably would have to acknowledge and accept Jesus ’ role in the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose .
After doing so , that person could get baptized .
This would be the only water baptism having God’s approval .
The Bible record provides abundant evidence that in the first century , new disciples of Christ understood the significance of baptism . And they did not unnecessarily delay getting baptized . ​ — Acts 2 : 41 ; 9 : 18 ; 16 : 14 , 15 , 32 , 33 .
9 , 10 .
What can we learn about baptism from the Ethiopian proselyte and from the apostle Paul ?
Read Acts 8 : 35 , 36 .
Consider the example of the Ethiopian proselyte who was returning home after going to Jerusalem to worship .
Prompted by Jehovah’s angel , Philip approached the Ethiopian and “ declared to him the good news about Jesus . ”
What was the Ethiopian’s response ?
What he did next gave clear evidence of his heartfelt appreciation for the truths he had learned .
He desired to work in harmony with Jehovah’s arrangement , so he got baptized without delay .
A second example is that of a Jewish man who was persecuting Christians .
He was born in a nation that was dedicated to God .
However , the Jews had lost their special relationship with Jehovah .
That man was zealous for the traditions of Judaism , but he learned a better way .
He received a personal witness from the resurrected and glorified Jesus Christ .
What was the man’s response ?
He welcomed assistance from the Christian disciple Ananias .
Regarding that man the Bible tells us : “ He then got up and was baptized . ”
You certainly recognize that Jewish man as the one who came to be known as the apostle Paul .
But reflect on the fact that once he gained appreciation for the truth about Jesus ’ role in the outworking of God’s purpose , Paul acted . He got baptized without delay . ​ — Read Acts 22 : 12 - 16 .
( a ) What motivates Bible students today to get baptized ?
( b ) How are we affected when we see newly dedicated ones get baptized ?
It is much the same with Bible students today , whether young or old . Those who have faith and genuine appreciation for Bible truth are eager to make a personal dedication and get baptized .
The talk presented especially for such ones is a highlight of every assembly and convention .
Jehovah’s Witnesses rejoice when a Bible student accepts the truth and progresses to the point of water baptism .
Do not Christian parents delight to see their children among the other new disciples getting baptized ?
During the 2017 service year , more than 284,000 “ rightly disposed ” individuals symbolized their dedication to Jehovah by water baptism .
Clearly , those new disciples understood that baptism is a requirement for Christians .
What steps led up to their baptism ?
What steps must a Bible student take before baptism ?
Before a student can get baptized , he must cultivate faith based on accurate knowledge of God , His purpose , and His arrangement for salvation .
Such faith moves the student to reject conduct that is displeasing to God and to come in line with Jehovah’s righteous standards .
Understandably , an individual could not make a valid dedication to God while engaging in any conduct that would exclude him from the Kingdom .
But more is needed than adhering to Jehovah’s elevated moral standards . One who is pursuing righteousness would also be present at congregation meetings and have a meaningful share in the lifesaving preaching and disciple - making work .
Jesus said that this work would be carried out by his true disciples .
Only after taking such steps can a new disciple make a valid dedication to Jehovah in private prayer and then publicly symbolize this dedication by getting baptized before onlookers .
Do you bear in mind the importance of baptism , conveying that to your student ?
( See paragraph 13 )
Why must Bible teachers bear in mind that baptism is a Christian requirement ?
As we assist our children and other Bible students to take the essential steps , we should bear in mind that genuine discipleship includes baptism .
If we keep that clearly in mind , we will communicate more effectively with our students .
We will not hold back from discussing at appropriate times the importance of dedication and baptism .
Yes , we want our children and other Bible students to progress to the point of baptism !
Why do we not pressure anyone to get baptized ?
Certainly , no one should feel pressured by a parent , a Bible teacher , or anyone else in the congregation to get baptized .
That is not Jehovah’s way .
Rather , as we teach such ones , we ought to emphasize the importance of building a personal relationship with God .
It is the student’s heartfelt appreciation for the truth and his desire to shoulder the yoke of Christian discipleship that will move him to get baptized . ​ — 2 Cor . 5 : 14 , 15 .
15 , 16 . ( a ) Is there a certain age at which one should get baptized ?
Explain . ( b ) Why must a Bible student get baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses even if he was previously baptized in another religion ?
There is no set age at which one should get baptized .
Each student grows and matures at a different rate .
Many get baptized at a young age , and they go on to be faithful to Jehovah .
Other students see the importance of getting baptized after learning Bible truth when advanced in years ​ — some being over 100 years of age !
One elderly Bible student asked her teacher if it was really necessary to get baptized again ; she had previously been baptized in different religions over the years .
The student and her teacher reviewed pertinent scriptures from the Bible .
The student now understood the Bible’s requirement and got baptized soon thereafter .
Although in her late 70 ’ s , she did not feel that baptism was unnecessary for her .
Yes , valid baptism is based on an accurate knowledge of Jehovah’s will .
Hence , new disciples must get baptized even if they previously were baptized in another religion . ​ — Read Acts 19 : 3 - 5 .
What is it appropriate to contemplate on the day of one’s baptism ?
The day of one’s baptism is a time for genuine rejoicing .
It is also a time for sober reflection . Living up to one’s dedication involves hard work .
That is why Jesus compared Christian discipleship to a yoke .
Jesus ’ disciples must “ live no longer for themselves , but for him who died for them and was raised up . ” ​ — 2 Cor . 5 : 15 ; Matt .
16 : 24 . What questions will we consider in the next article ?
Maria’s mother had such thoughts in mind when she asked the questions mentioned in the introduction .
If you are a parent , you may have asked yourself : ‘ Is my child really ready to get baptized ?
Does he or she have adequate knowledge to make a valid dedication ?

What about secular goals associated with education and a career ?
What if my child gets baptized and then falls into serious sin ? ’
In the next article , we will consider these matters and discuss how Christian parents can maintain a balanced view of baptism .
Before qualified Bible students are baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses , they are asked in front of onlookers to respond to two questions .
The first question is , “ On the basis of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ , have you repented of your sins and dedicated yourself to Jehovah to do his will ? ”
Why is it reasonable to conclude that individuals who present themselves for baptism have already made an unreserved dedication to Jehovah ?
Just about a year before Jesus gave the commission to “ make disciples . . . , baptizing them , ” he provided insight into what would be required of his followers .
In a discussion with his apostles and other disciples , he said : “ If anyone wants to come after me , let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and keep following me . ” ​ — Matt . 16 : 24 .
Jesus ’ whole life revolved around doing his Father’s will .
Thus , Bible students who wish to observe all the things that Jesus commanded must disown themselves , dedicating themselves unreservedly to Jehovah .
In imitation of Jesus , they consider Jehovah’s will to be paramount in their lives .
When presenting themselves for baptism , such new disciples confirm that they have disowned themselves and are determined to serve God with all their strength , means , and abilities .
For these reasons , baptism candidates are asked to confirm that they have dedicated themselves to Jehovah to do his will .
“ Be hospitable to one another without grumbling . ” ​ — 1 PET .
4 : 9 .
SONGS : 100 , 87
the need for hospitality within the congregation ?
opportunities we have to extend hospitality ?
overcoming barriers to extending hospitality ?
What conditions did first - century Christians face ?
SOMETIME between the years 62 and 64 C.E . , the apostle Peter wrote to “ the temporary residents scattered about in Pontus , Galatia , Cappadocia , Asia , and Bithynia . ”
These culturally diverse congregations in Asia Minor needed encouragement and guidance .
They were suffering opposition and were subjected to abusive speech .
They faced “ fiery trials . ”
And they lived at a critical time .
“ The end of all things has drawn close , ” wrote Peter .
Yes , the violent end of the Jewish system of things would come in less than a decade .
What could help Christians everywhere to get through those stressful times ? ​ — 1 Pet . 4 : 4 , 7 , 12 .
2 , 3 .
Why did Peter urge his brothers to show hospitality ?
( See opening picture . )

Among other things , Peter urged his brothers : “ Be hospitable to one another . ”
The word “ hospitality ” in Greek literally means “ fondness for , or kindness to , strangers . ”
Note , however , that Peter urged his Christian brothers and sisters to be hospitable “ to one another , ” to those whom they already knew and associated with .
How would being hospitable help them ?
It would draw them together .
Consider your own experience .
Have you had the pleasure of being invited to someone’s home ?
Did that occasion not leave you with warm memories ?
When you entertained some from your congregation , was your friendship not deepened ?
By extending hospitality , we get to know our brothers and sisters in a more personal way than we can in other settings .
Christians in Peter’s day needed to draw ever closer as conditions grew worse .
The same is true for Christians in these “ last days . ” ​ — 2 Tim .
3 : 1 . What questions will we consider in this article ?
What opportunities do we have for extending hospitality “ to one another ” ?
How can we overcome barriers that may hinder us from being hospitable ?
What can help us be good guests ?
How can we be hospitable at our Christian meetings ?
At meetings : We welcome all who attend our Christian meetings as fellow guests at a spiritual meal .
Jehovah and his organization are our hosts .
When new ones attend , we become cohosts , as it were .
Why not take the initiative to welcome these new ones , no matter how they may be dressed or groomed ?
If a visitor is not already being cared for , could you invite him to sit with you ?
He might appreciate help to follow the program and perhaps to find scriptures being read .
This would be a fine way to “ follow the course of hospitality . ” ​ — Rom .
12 : 13 .
Who should be among the primary guests in our homes ?
For refreshments or a meal : In Bible times , hospitality normally included inviting someone to one’s home for a meal .
An invitation to share food was an invitation to friendship and peace .
Who should be among our primary guests ?
Those who are a regular part of our lives , the brothers and sisters in our congregation .
When hard times come , will we not depend on one another ?
We need loyal friendships and peace with all of them .
Interestingly , in 2011 the Governing Body changed the time of the Watchtower Study for the United States Bethel family from 6 : 45 p.m . to 6 : 15 p.m .
Why ?
The announcement stated that more will likely be inclined to show and accept hospitality with fellow Bethelites when the meeting ends earlier .

Other branch offices followed suit .
This arrangement has drawn Bethel families closer than ever .
7 , 8 .
How can we provide hospitality to visiting representatives of Jehovah’s organization ?
Visits of public speakers from other congregations , as well as visits of circuit overseers and , at times , representatives from the local branch office , provide opportunities for us to extend hospitality .
( Read 3 John 5 - 8 . )
Providing refreshments or a meal is one fine way of doing this .
Could you assist ?
A sister in the United States remembers : “ Over the years , my husband and I have had the opportunity to provide hospitality in our home for many speakers and their wives .
Every experience has been a delight ​ — fun and , most of all , spiritually edifying .
We have never regretted it . ”

9 , 10 . ( a ) Who may need long - term hospitality ?
( b ) Can even those who have modest dwellings assist ?
Illustrate .
Long - term guests : In ancient times , hospitality often included providing lodging for trustworthy visitors .
In our day , too , such a need arises .
Circuit overseers often need lodging when they visit the congregations .

Students at theocratic schools may need places to stay , as may construction volunteers .
Natural disasters may leave some families homeless and in need of lodging until relief efforts can restore their dwellings .
We should not assume that only those who have very comfortable homes are in a position to help ; they may already have done so many times .
Could you share in offering accommodations even if your circumstances are modest ?
A brother in South Korea fondly remembers that he provided accommodations for students attending theocratic schools .
He writes : “ I hesitated initially because we were newly married and living in a small house .
But having students stay with us was truly a joyous experience .
As newlyweds , we were able to see how happy a couple can be when they serve Jehovah and pursue spiritual goals together . ”
Why may those who are new to your congregation need hospitality ?
New to the congregation : Individuals and families may move to your area .
Some may come to serve where the need is greater .
Pioneers may be sent to assist in your congregation .
All of them are initially out of their element to some extent ​ — in a new community , new congregation , perhaps even a new language or culture .
Inviting them for refreshments , a meal , or an outing will help them to make new friends and adjust to their changed circumstances .
What experience shows that hospitality need not be elaborate ?
Hospitality need not be elaborate .
( Read Luke 10 : 41 , 42 . )

In recounting the early days of his service as a missionary , a brother says : “ We were young , inexperienced , and homesick .
One evening my wife was particularly homesick , and my efforts to help were not working .
Then , about 7 : 30 p.m . , we heard a knock on the door .
There stood a Bible student who brought us three oranges .
She had come to welcome the new missionaries .
We invited her in and gave her a glass of water .
Then we made tea and hot chocolate .
We didn’t know Swahili yet , and she didn’t know English .
But that incident began our greatest delight in forging friendships with the local brothers . ”
What benefits come from being hospitable ?
Have you held back from offering hospitality ?
If so , you may have missed out on opportunities for delightful company and for forming lasting friendships .

Hospitality is one of the finest antidotes to loneliness .
But you may wonder , ‘ Why would anyone hold back ? ’
There could be a number of reasons .
What might we do if having little time and energy limits our accepting or extending hospitality ?
Time and energy : Jehovah’s servants are very busy and often have multiple commitments .
Some may feel that they simply do not have the time or energy to show hospitality .
If that is your situation , it may be that you need to examine your current schedule of activities .
Could you make some adjustments so that you will have time and energy to accept or offer hospitality ?
The Scriptures urge Christians to extend hospitality .

It is not wrong to make time for this ; actually , it is the right thing to do .
You may , of course , need to be willing to limit some optional activities .
What anxieties about extending hospitality might some have ?
Your feelings about yourself : Have you ever wanted to be hospitable but felt inadequate ?
Some are shy and fear that conversation would lag or that guests might not feel entertained .
Others have limited income and believe that they could never offer what other members of the congregation could .
Remember , of prime importance about a home is , not that it is fancy , but that it is orderly , clean , and inviting .
16 , 17 .
What may alleviate worries about having guests ?
If you feel anxious about having guests , you are not alone .
An elder in Britain admits : “ There can be a measure of nervousness in preparing for guests .

But as with anything in relation to serving Jehovah , the benefits and satisfaction that result far outweigh any anxiety .
I have enjoyed simply sitting down with guests over coffee and talking . ”
Remember that showing personal interest in guests is always helpful .
Nearly everyone enjoys sharing his experiences in life .
Social occasions may be the only times others ask to hear about our experiences .
Another elder writes : “ Having friends from the congregation to my home helps me to understand them better and gives me time to get to know them , especially how they came into the truth . ”
Loving interest can make any occasion a delight .
A pioneer sister who hosted students attending various theocratic schools admitted : “ Initially I was concerned because my accommodations are very modest , and I have secondhand furniture .
The wife of one of the instructors really put me at ease .

She said that when she and her husband are serving in the traveling work , their best weeks are those spent staying with a spiritual person who may not have much materially but who has the same focus as they have ​ — serving Jehovah and keeping life simple .

This reminded me of what my mum used to say to us as children : ‘ Better a dish of vegetables where there’s love . ’ ”
Let love motivate your hospitality , and you need not worry .
18 , 19 .
How can being hospitable help us overcome negative feelings about others ?
Your feelings about others : Is there someone in your congregation who rubs you the wrong way ?
Your initial feelings about that person may be negative and can become long - lasting if nothing is done to improve them .
Personality differences may neutralize your good intentions to extend hospitality .
Or someone may have hurt you in the past , and you find it hard to forget .
To improve relationships , even with enemies , the Bible recommends hospitality .

( Read Proverbs 25 : 21 , 22 . )
Extending hospitality to someone can reduce friction and soften hard feelings .
It can bring to the surface lovable aspects of our guest’s personality , aspects that Jehovah saw when he drew that one to the truth .
If extended with love , an unexpected invitation can be the start of a completely changed relationship .
How can you make sure that love is your honest motive ?
One way is by following the encouragement given at Philippians 2 : 3 : “ With humility consider others superior to you . ”
Finding ways that our brothers or sisters are superior to us ​ — be it their faith , endurance , fearlessness , or some other Christian quality — ​ will deepen our love for them and open the way for genuine and healing hospitality .
Hosts usually prepare well for their guests ( See paragraph 20 )
Why and how should we honor an invitation we have accepted ?

The psalmist David asked : “ O Jehovah , who may be a guest in your tent ? ”
He followed that question with a discussion of spiritual qualities that God looks for in his guests .
One quality is being true to our word : “ He does not go back on his promise , even when it is bad for him . ”
If we accept an invitation , we should not cancel frivolously .
Our host may well have made preparations , and all his effort may be for nothing if we cancel .
Some have at times canceled a previous invitation in order to accept a seemingly better one .
Would that be loving and respectful ?
Rather , we should accept hospitality with genuine appreciation for whatever our hosts have to offer .
And if truly unavoidable circumstances force us to cancel , it would be loving and considerate to let our hosts know as soon as possible .
How can respecting local customs contribute to our being good guests ?
It is also important to respect local customs .
In some cultures , unexpected guests are welcome ; in others , prior arrangements are preferred .
In some places , hosts honor guests with the finest they have to offer , letting family take second place ; in others , everyone shares alike .
In some areas , guests normally bring something to contribute to the occasion ; in others , hosts are happier when their guests feel no such obligation .
And in some cultures , it is expected that guests politely decline the first invitation or two ; in others , to decline comes across as unappreciative .
Let us do our utmost to make our hosts happy that they invited us .
Why is it so important to “ be hospitable to one another ” ?
In a broader sense than ever , “ the end of all things has drawn close . ”
We face the greatest tribulation the world has ever seen .
As pressures mount , we will need the deepest of love between us and our brothers and sisters .
As never before , Peter’s counsel to Christians applies : “ Be hospitable to one another , ” a delightful and needed course that will have no end . ​ — 1 Pet .
4 : 9 .
LIFE STORY
As told by Erika Nöhrer Bright
I was among four little girls chosen to present Adolf Hitler with flowers after he gave a speech one time .
Why was I picked ?
My father was very involved in Nazi activities and was the chauffeur for the leader of a local branch of that party .
My mother was a devout Catholic and wanted me to be a nun .


Despite these two strong influences , I became neither a Nazi nor a nun .
Let me tell you why .
I WAS raised in Graz , Austria .
At age seven , I was sent to a school for religious training .

However , I witnessed shocking sexual immorality between priests and nuns .
So my mother allowed me to leave the school within a year .
Our family with Father in his military uniform
Later , I went to boarding school .
One night , Father came there to take me to safety because Graz was being heavily bombed .
We took refuge in the town of Schladming .
Just after we arrived and crossed a bridge , it was blown up .
Another time , low - flying airplanes shot at my grandmother and me in our yard .
By war’s end , it seemed that both the church and the government had failed us .
In 1950 , one of Jehovah’s Witnesses began sharing the Bible’s message with my mother .
I would listen to their conversations and even accompany Mother to some congregation meetings .
Becoming convinced that Jehovah’s Witnesses had the truth , she got baptized in 1952 .
At the time , the local congregation seemed to me like an old - ladies ’ club .
Later , however , we visited a congregation where there were many young people ​ — not an old - ladies ’ club at all !
When back in Graz , I started attending all the meetings , and soon I too was convinced that what I was learning was the truth .
I also came to know Jehovah as a God who gives his servants unfailing support .
He does so even when we feel that we are facing impossible circumstances alone . ​ — Ps .
3 : 5 , 6 .
I wanted to share the truth with others .
I started with my siblings .
My four older sisters had already left home to work as schoolteachers .

But I visited them in different villages and encouraged them to study the Bible .
Eventually , all my siblings did so and became Jehovah’s Witnesses .
During my second week in the door - to - door ministry , I met a woman in her 30 ’ s with whom I began to study the Bible .
She progressed to baptism , and later , so did her husband and two sons .
That study had a profound spiritual effect on me . Why ?
Well , no one had ever had a formal Bible study with me .
I had to prepare well for each lesson .
In a sense , I did so first to teach myself and then so that I could teach my student !
That really deepened my appreciation for the truth .
In April 1954 , I symbolized my dedication to Jehovah by water baptism .
In 1955 , I attended international conventions in Germany , France , and England .
While in London , I met Albert Schroeder .
He was an instructor at the Bible School of Gilead , and later he served as a member of the Governing Body .
During a tour of the British Museum , Brother Schroeder pointed out to us some Bible manuscripts .
They contained God’s name in Hebrew letters , and he explained their importance .
This touched me emotionally and spiritually , making me more determined than ever to promote the truth from God’s Word .
With my partner ( right ) , serving as special pioneers in Mistelbach , Austria
I began serving as a full - time pioneer on January 1 , 1956 .
Four months later , I was invited to serve as a special pioneer in Austria .
At the time , there were no Witnesses in Mistelbach , the town where I was to serve .
But I faced a particular challenge .
My pioneer partner and I were quite different .
I was almost 19 and from the city ; she was 25 and a country girl .
I liked to sleep late each morning ; she liked to get up early .
Come evening , I was inclined to stay up ; she wanted to go to bed early .


Still , applying the Bible’s advice , we worked out our differences and enjoyed success as pioneer partners .
Actually , we faced other significant challenges .
There was even some persecution , but we were “ not abandoned . ”
Once , while we were preaching in a rural village , the people turned their dogs loose .
My partner and I were soon surrounded by large dogs barking and baring their teeth .
We held hands , and I even prayed , “ Jehovah , please , when they get us , may we die quickly ! ”
When the dogs came within an arm’s length of us , they stopped , wagged their tails , and walked away .
We felt that Jehovah had protected us .
After that , we preached throughout that village , and to our delight , the people were very receptive .
Perhaps they were surprised that the dogs had not harmed us or that we had persevered after such a frightening experience .
Some of them eventually became Witnesses .
We had another frightening experience .
One day our landlord came home drunk , threatening to kill us and claiming that we were disturbing the neighborhood .
His wife tried to calm him but without success .
We heard all of that from our room upstairs .
We quickly put chairs in front of our door and started packing our suitcases .
When we opened the door , our landlord was standing at the top of the stairs , holding a huge knife .
So we fled through the back door and down the long garden path with all our belongings , never to return .
We went to a hotel and asked for a room .
As it turned out , we stayed there for almost a year , which ultimately benefited our ministry .
How so ? The hotel was in the center of town , and some of our Bible students wanted to study there .
Soon we were holding the book study and the weekly Watchtower Study in our hotel room , with about 15 attending .
We stayed in Mistelbach for more than a year .
Then I was reassigned to Feldbach , southeast of Graz .
I had a new pioneer partner , but again there was no congregation .
We lived in a tiny room on the second floor of a log cabin .
The wind whistled through the gaps between the logs , so we tried to block the holes with newspapers .
We also had to collect water from a well . But it was worth it .
Within a few months , a group was established .
Eventually , some 30 members of a family with whom we studied came into the truth !
Such experiences strengthened my appreciation for Jehovah’s unfailing support of those who pursue Kingdom interests .
Even if we are beyond the reach of human help , Jehovah is always there . ​ — Ps . 121 : 1 - 3 .
In 1958 an international convention was to be held in New York City , at Yankee Stadium and Polo Grounds .
I applied to attend , and the Austria branch asked whether I would be interested in attending the 32nd class of Gilead School .
How could I refuse such a privilege ?
I immediately responded , “ Yes ! ”
In class at Gilead , I sat next to Martin Poetzinger .
He had endured dreadful experiences in Nazi concentration camps .
He too later served as a member of the Governing Body .
During class , Martin would sometimes whisper , “ Erika , what does that mean in German ? ”
Halfway through the course , Nathan Knorr announced our assignments .
Mine was to Paraguay .
Because I was so young , I needed my father’s permission to enter that country .
After obtaining that , I arrived in Paraguay in March 1959 .
I was assigned to a missionary home in Asunción , with a new partner .

Before long , I met Walter Bright , a missionary who had graduated from the 30th class .
In time , we married and could face life’s challenges together .
Whenever we encountered a trying problem , we read Jehovah’s promise at Isaiah 41 : 10 : “ Do not be afraid , for I am with you .

Do not be anxious , for I am your God .
I will fortify you . ”
This reassured us that as long as we strove to remain faithful to God and put his Kingdom first , he would never fail us .
In time , we were assigned to an area close to the Brazil border .
There the clergy incited young people to throw rocks at our missionary home , which was already not in the best condition .
Then Walter started a Bible study with the chief of police .
He made sure that police officers stood near our home for a week , and the persecutors gave us no more trouble .
Shortly thereafter , we were moved to more suitable quarters across the Brazilian border .
This proved to be advantageous because we could hold meetings both in Paraguay and in Brazil .
Before we left that assignment , there were two small congregations .
With my husband , Walter , when we were serving as missionaries in Asunción , Paraguay
My doctors had told me that I could not have children , so we were surprised to learn in 1962 that I was expecting !
We eventually settled in Hollywood , Florida , near Walter’s family .
For a number of years , Walter and I were not in a position to pioneer . We had to care for a family .
Still , we continued to give priority to Kingdom interests . ​ — Matt . 6 : 33 .
When we arrived in Florida in November 1962 , we were surprised to find that local sentiments about integration meant that black brothers held their meetings separately from white brothers and that they preached in separate areas .
But Jehovah does not make racial distinctions , and before too long the congregations became racially integrated .
Jehovah’s hand in this arrangement was apparent , as there are now dozens of congregations in the area .


Sadly , Walter died of brain cancer in 2015 .

He was a wonderful husband for 55 years , one who loved Jehovah and helped many brothers .
I look forward to seeing him again in renewed health when he is resurrected . ​ — Acts 24 : 15 .
I am grateful to have been in the full - time service for over 40 years , experiencing many joys and rewards .

For example , Walter and I were able to be present for the baptisms of 136 of our Bible students .
Of course , there were some hardships .
But we never viewed these as a reason to stop serving our faithful God .
Instead , we drew closer to him , trusting him to resolve matters in his own time and in his own way .
And he does ! ​ — 2 Tim . 4 : 16 , 17 .
I do miss Walter very much , but pioneering helps me to cope .
I find it especially beneficial to teach others , even sharing the resurrection hope with them .
Indeed , in more ways than I can recount , Jehovah has never failed me .
True to his promise , he has sustained me , fortified me , and taken hold of me with his “ right hand of righteousness . ” ​ — Isa .
41 : 10 .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :

Two brothers offer a tract to a painter on the bridge in front of Kaštilac , a fortress built in the 16th century , near the city of Split
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2016 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
Frankly , no man today can be certain of Paul’s appearance .
The drawings and paintings in our publications are artistic representations , not images based on proven archaeological facts .
However , there are some indications of Paul’s appearance .
For example , Zion’s Watch Tower of March 1 , 1902 , mentioned one , saying : “ As to Paul’s personal appearance : . . .
In the ‘ Acts of Paul and Thecla , ’ . . . written about A .
D . 150 , there is a description of Paul which is probably the best , and a true tradition .


In this he is described as ‘ small in size , bald - headed , bandy - legged , well built , with eyebrows meeting ; rather long nosed . ’ ”
The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church ( 1997 edition ) says about that ancient writing : “ It is not impossible that the ‘ Acts ’ contain some elements of historical truth . ”

The Acts of Paul and Thecla was highly regarded in early centuries , as confirmed by the fact that 80 Greek manuscripts of it exist , as well as versions in other languages .
Thus , our artistic presentations are in line with some ancient indications of what the apostle looked like .
Bear in mind , though , that other things are more significant than Paul’s appearance .
Even while Paul was carrying on his ministry , some fleshly critics charged that “ his presence in person [ was ] weak and his speech contemptible . ”
But we should not forget that he became a Christian by a miraculous display from Jesus . We can also think about what Paul accomplished as “ a chosen vessel to [ Christ ] to bear [ Jesus ’ ] name to the nations . ”
And consider how much benefit we can draw from the Bible books that Jehovah inspired Paul to write .
Paul did not boast over his accomplishments before becoming a Christian ; nor did he describe his physical appearance .
He admitted : “ I am the least of the apostles , and I am not worthy of being called an apostle . ”
He later wrote : “ To me , a man less than the least of all holy ones , this undeserved kindness was given , so that I should declare to the nations the good news about the unfathomable riches of the Christ . ”
That message is certainly more significant than any concern about what Paul may have looked like .
“ Those whom Jehovah loves he disciplines . ” ​ — HEB .
12 : 6 .
SONGS : 123 , 86
What has Shebna’s experience taught you about God’s discipline ?
When giving discipline , how can we imitate Jehovah and his Son ?
We can view discipline as preparing us for what ?
How is discipline often presented in the Bible ?
WHEN you hear the word “ discipline , ” what comes to mind ?
Perhaps you immediately think of punishment , but much more is involved .
In the Bible , discipline is often presented in an appealing light , at times alongside knowledge , wisdom , love , and life .
That is because God’s discipline is an expression of his love for us and of his desire that we gain everlasting life .
While his discipline may include chastisement , it is never abusive or cruel .
Indeed , the meaning behind “ discipline ” primarily relates to education , such as that involved in raising a beloved child .
2 , 3 .
How may discipline include both teaching and punishment ?
( See opening picture . )
Consider this example : A little boy named Johnny is throwing a ball in the house .
His mother says : “ Johnny , you know that you should not play with your ball in the house !
You might break something . ”
But disregarding his mother’s direction , he continues to play with the ball and accidentally breaks a vase .
How will his mother discipline him ?
Her discipline may involve both teaching and some punishment .
In teaching him , she may remind Johnny why his conduct was wrong .
She wants to convey to him the wisdom of obeying his parents , explaining that their rules are necessary and reasonable . Then reinforcing her words , she may administer some form of appropriate punishment . For example , she might take the ball away from Johnny for a period of time . That may impress on him that disobedience has consequences .
As members of the Christian congregation , we are part of God’s household .
We therefore respect Jehovah’s right both to set standards and to give loving discipline when we violate them .
Moreover , if our actions caused unpleasant consequences , his discipline would remind us of just how important it is to listen to our heavenly Father .
God cares deeply for us and wants to spare us heartache . ​ — 1 Pet . 5 : 6 , 7 .
( a ) Jehovah blesses what kind of training ?
( b ) What will we consider in this article ?
By giving Scriptural discipline , we can help our child or a Bible student to reach the goal of becoming a follower of Christ .
God’s Word , our primary tool for training , enables us to ‘ discipline in righteousness . ’ Thus our child or Bible student can be helped to understand and ‘ observe all the things Jesus commanded us . ’
Jehovah blesses this kind of training , which equips students to make yet more disciples of Christ .
( Read Titus 2 : 11 - 14 . )
Let us now consider the answers to three important questions : ( 1 ) How does God’s discipline reflect his love for us ?
( 2 ) What can we learn from those whom God disciplined in the past ?
( 3 ) When we give discipline , how can we imitate Jehovah and his Son ?
In what ways does discipline from Jehovah reflect his love for us ?
Motivated by love , Jehovah corrects , educates , and trains us so that we can remain in his love and on the path to life .
He never demeans or insults us , causing us to question our personal value .
Rather , Jehovah dignifies us , appealing to the goodness in our heart and respecting our free will .
Is that how you view God’s discipline , whether it comes through his Word , Bible - based publications , Christian parents , or congregation elders ?
Indeed , elders who try to readjust us in a mild and loving manner when we take “ a false step , ” perhaps unknowingly , reflect Jehovah’s love for us . ​ — Gal .
6 : 1 . When discipline involves restrictions , how does this reflect God’s love ?
At times , though , discipline may involve more than counsel or oral correction .
If more serious sins are involved , it may include a loss of privileges in the congregation .
Even when that is the case , such discipline reflects God’s love for us .
A loss of privileges , for example , can help a person realize how important it is for him to focus more on personal Bible study , meditation , and prayer .
He can thus be strengthened spiritually .
In time , privileges may be restored .

Even disfellowshipping reflects Jehovah’s love , for it protects the congregation from bad influences .
And because God disciplines to the proper degree , disfellowshipping can impress on the wrongdoer the seriousness of his sin and move him to repentance . ​ — Acts 3 : 19 .
Who was Shebna , and what bad trait did he begin to develop ?

To underscore the value of discipline , let us consider two individuals whom Jehovah disciplined : Shebna , who lived in the time of King Hezekiah , and Graham , a brother in our day .
As the steward “ in charge of the house ” ​ — presumably that of Hezekiah — ​ Shebna had considerable authority .
Sadly , though , he became proud , seeking his own glory .
He even had an opulent tomb made for himself , and he rode in “ glorious chariots ” ! ​ — Isa .
22 : 16 - 18 .
Humbly adjusting our attitude leads to God’s blessing ( See paragraphs 8 - 10 )
How did Jehovah discipline Shebna , and with what result ?
Because Shebna pursued glory for himself , God ‘ threw him out of his office ’ and replaced him with Eliakim .
This change occurred when Assyrian King Sennacherib was intending to attack Jerusalem .
Sometime later , that king sent high officials to Jerusalem , along with a large army , to demoralize the Jews and intimidate Hezekiah into surrendering .

Eliakim was sent to speak to the officials , but he was not alone .
He was accompanied by two others , one of whom was Shebna , now serving as secretary .
Might this not suggest that Shebna did not give way to bitterness and resentment but instead humbly accepted his lesser responsibilities ?
If so , what lessons can we learn from the account ?
Let us consider three .
9 - 11 . ( a ) What important lessons can we learn from Shebna’s experience ?
( b ) How are you encouraged by Jehovah’s treatment of Shebna ?
First , Shebna lost his position .
His experience bears out the warning that “ pride is before a crash , and a haughty spirit before stumbling . ”
If you have privileges in the congregation , perhaps with a measure of prominence , will you strive to maintain a humble view of yourself ?
Will you give credit to Jehovah for any gifts you have or for what you have accomplished ?
The apostle Paul wrote : “ I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think , but to think so as to have a sound mind . ” ​ — Rom .
12 : 3 .

Second , in strongly reproving Shebna , Jehovah may have been showing that he did not consider Shebna beyond recovery .
What a fine lesson for those who lose privileges of service in God’s congregation today !
Instead of being angry and resentful , may they continue to serve God to the best of their ability in their new situation , viewing the discipline as evidence of Jehovah’s love .
Remember , our Father will not consider us beyond hope if we humble ourselves before him .
( Read 1 Peter 5 : 6 , 7 . )
Loving discipline can be God’s way of molding us , so let us remain malleable in his hands .
Third , Jehovah’s treatment of Shebna provides a valuable lesson for those who are authorized to administer discipline , such as parents and Christian overseers .
The lesson ?
While Jehovah’s discipline can reflect his hatred of sin , it can also show his concern for the person who sinned .
If as a parent or an overseer you must administer discipline , will you imitate Jehovah , hating the wrong while looking for the good in your child or fellow believer ? ​ — Jude 22 , 23 .
12 - 14 . ( a ) In what ways do some react to divine discipline ?
( b ) How did God’s Word help one brother to adjust his attitude , and with what results ?
Sadly , after receiving discipline , some fail to see past the pain and even draw away from God and his people .
But does that mean that such ones are beyond help ?
Consider Graham , who was disfellowshipped , in time was reinstated , and then became spiritually inactive .
Some years later , he asked an elder who had befriended him to study the Bible with him .


The elder recalled : “ Graham had a problem with pride .
He was critical of the elders who had been involved in his disfellowshipping .
So for the next few studies , we discussed scriptures on pride and its effects .
Graham began to see himself clearly in the mirror of God’s Word , and he did not like what he saw ! The effect was amazing !
After acknowledging that he had been blinded by a ‘ rafter ’ of pride and that his critical attitude was his problem , he began to change quickly for the better .
He started to attend Christian meetings regularly , to study God’s Word earnestly , and to make daily prayer a habit .
He also accepted his spiritual responsibilities as family head , much to the delight of his wife and children . ” ​ — Luke 6 : 41 , 42 ; Jas . 1 : 23 - 25 .
The elder continues : “ One day , Graham told me something that touched my heart .
‘ I’ve known the truth for years , ’ he said , ‘ and I’ve even served as a pioneer . But only now can I honestly say that I love Jehovah . ’
Before long , he was asked to serve as a microphone handler at the Kingdom Hall ​ — a privilege he deeply appreciated .
His example taught me that when a person humbles himself before God by accepting discipline , blessings just pour out ! ”
If we want our discipline to reach hearts , what must we do ?
To be good teachers , we first have to be good students .
Likewise , those divinely authorized to give discipline must themselves continue to submit willingly to Jehovah’s guidance .
Such humble submission earns them respect and gives them freeness of speech when training or correcting others .
Consider Jesus ’ example .
What are some lessons about appropriate discipline and effective teaching that we can learn from Jesus ?
Jesus always listened obediently to his Father , even when doing so was very difficult .
And he gave his Father the credit for his teachings and wisdom .
Jesus ’ humility and obedience drew people of honest heart to him and helped to make him a compassionate and gracious teacher .

( Read Luke 4 : 22 . )
His kind words heartened those who were figuratively like a bruised reed or the wick of an oil lamp about to go out .

Even when his patience was tested , Jesus was kind and loving .
This was evident when he corrected his apostles for showing a selfish , ambitious spirit . ​ — Mark 9 : 33 - 37 ; Luke 22 : 24 - 27 .
What fine qualities will help elders to be effective shepherds of God’s flock ?
All who are authorized to give Scriptural discipline are wise when they imitate Christ’s example .
Indeed , their doing so reflects their desire to be molded by God and his Son .
The apostle Peter wrote : “ Shepherd the flock of God under your care , serving as overseers , not under compulsion , but willingly before God ; not for love of dishonest gain , but eagerly ; not lording it over those who are God’s inheritance , but becoming examples to the flock . ”
To be sure , overseers who joyfully submit to God and to Christ , the head of the congregation , benefit both themselves and those under their care . ​ — Isa .
32 : 1 , 2 , 17 , 18 .

( a ) What does Jehovah require of parents ?
( b ) How does God help parents fulfill their responsibilities ?
The same basic principles apply in the family .
Family heads are told : “ Do not be irritating your children , but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah . ”
How serious is this matter ?
Proverbs 19 : 18 states : “ Discipline your son while there is hope , and do not become responsible for his death . ”
Yes , Jehovah holds Christian parents accountable if they fail to provide needed discipline to a child !

However , Jehovah gives parents the wisdom and the strength they need when they humbly entreat him in prayer and look to his Word and holy spirit for guidance . ​ — Read James 1 : 5 .
19 , 20 . ( a ) What blessings result from accepting God’s discipline ?
( b ) What will we consider in the next article ?
It would be difficult to enumerate all the blessings that result from accepting divine discipline and from imitating Jehovah and Jesus when disciplining others .
At the very least , families and congregations become havens of peace .
Individuals also feel truly loved , valued , and secure ​ — a foretaste of the blessings to come .
Indeed , it is no exaggeration to say that Jehovah’s discipline teaches us how to live together forever in peace and harmony as a family under his fatherly care .

( Read Isaiah 11 : 9 . )
When we view divine discipline in that light , we will be more likely to appreciate it for what it truly is : beautiful evidence of God’s unmatched love for us .
In the following article , we will expand on aspects of discipline within the family and the congregation .
We will also consider self - discipline as well as something that can be even worse than any temporary pain that discipline may cause .
“ My sons , . . . listen to discipline and become wise . ” ​ — PROV .
8 : 32 , 33 .
SONGS : 56 , 89
In what ways does Jehovah patiently teach us self - discipline ?
How can parents raise their children in the discipline of Jehovah ?
How can we benefit fully from any Scriptural discipline we may receive in the Christian congregation ?
How do we acquire wisdom , and with what benefit ?
JEHOVAH is the Source of wisdom , and he generously shares his wisdom with others .
Says James 1 : 5 : “ If any one of you is lacking in wisdom , let him keep asking God , for he gives generously to all and without reproaching . ”
One way that we acquire wisdom from God is by accepting his discipline .
And that wisdom can safeguard us from moral and spiritual harm .
As a result , we “ keep [ ourselves ] in God’s love . . . with everlasting life in view . ” ​ — Jude 21 .
How can we build appreciation for God’s discipline ?
However , our sinful leanings , our upbringing , and other factors make it a challenge to accept discipline or to view it in the right light .
We build appreciation for discipline when we experience its benefits , which confirm God’s love for us .
“ My son , do not reject the discipline of Jehovah , . . . for those whom Jehovah loves he reproves , ” says Proverbs 3 : 11 , 12 .
Yes , let us never forget that Jehovah has our best interests at heart .
( Read Hebrews 12 : 5 - 11 . )
Because God fully knows us , his discipline is always appropriate and properly measured .
Let us now examine four aspects of discipline : ( 1 ) self - discipline , ( 2 ) parental discipline , ( 3 ) discipline within the Christian congregation , and ( 4 ) something that is worse than the temporary pain of discipline .
How does a child develop self - discipline ?
Illustrate .
Self - discipline includes exercising control over ourselves in order to improve in our behavior and thinking .
We are not born with an inclination toward self - discipline .
We have to learn it . To illustrate : When a child first learns to ride a bicycle , a parent usually holds the bicycle to steady it .
But as the child finds his balance , the parent cautiously lets go for a few moments at a time .
He lets go altogether when the child can keep his balance .
Likewise , when parents consistently and patiently train their little ones “ in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah , ” they are also helping their children to develop self - discipline and wisdom . ​ — Eph .
6 : 4 .
4 , 5 . ( a ) Why is self - discipline an important part of “ the new personality ” ?
( b ) Why should we not give up on ourselves even if we “ fall seven times , ” as it were ?
The same principles apply to those who come to know Jehovah as adults . True , they may already have developed a measure of self - discipline .
Spiritually speaking , however , a new disciple starts off being immature .
But he or she can steadily grow toward maturity as part of learning to put on the Christlike “ new personality . ”
Self - discipline is an important part of that growth .
As a result , we learn “ to reject ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things . ” ​ — Titus 2 : 12 .
That said , we are all prone to sin .
A fall , however , need not spell complete failure or a serious lack of self - discipline .
“ The righteous one may fall seven times , and he will get up again , ” says Proverbs 24 : 16 .
What will help him to succeed ?
Not sheer willpower , but God’s spirit .
( Read Philippians 4 : 13 . )
The fruitage of that spirit includes self - control , which is closely related to self - discipline .
How can we become better students of God’s Word ? ( See opening picture . )
Also important to cultivating self - discipline are heartfelt prayer , Bible study , and meditation .
But what if you find it hard to study God’s Word ?
Perhaps you do not consider yourself to be studious .
Keep in mind , however , that Jehovah will help you if you let him .

He can help you to “ form a longing ” for his Word .
First , pray to Jehovah for the needed self - discipline to study his Word .

Then , work in harmony with your prayers , perhaps keeping study periods rather short .
Over time , study will be both easier and more pleasurable !
Indeed , you will find yourself cherishing your quiet times when you are absorbed in Jehovah’s precious thoughts . ​ — 1 Tim .
4 : 15 .
How can self - discipline help us to reach a spiritual goal ?
Self - discipline helps us to reach spiritual goals .
Consider the example of a family man who felt that his zeal was waning somewhat .
Concerned , he set the goal of becoming a regular pioneer and read articles on that topic in our magazines .
This , along with prayer , built him up and strengthened him spiritually .
He also arranged to be an auxiliary pioneer when he could .
The result ?
Despite obstacles , he kept his eye on the goal of becoming a regular pioneer and eventually reached it .
Children are not born knowing right from wrong ; they need training ( See paragraph 8 )
8 - 10 .
What can help Christian parents succeed in raising their children to serve Jehovah ?
Illustrate .
Christian parents have a precious privilege ​ — that of raising their children “ in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah . ”
That is a major undertaking , especially in today’s world .
Of course , children are not born knowing right from wrong .
They are born with the faculty of conscience , but it needs to be educated , or disciplined .
One Bible reference work suggests that the Greek word translated “ discipline ” might be rendered “ child development . ”
Children who are lovingly disciplined usually feel secure .
They learn that freedom has boundaries and that decisions and conduct have consequences ​ — good or bad .
How important , then , that Christian parents look to Jehovah for guidance .
Do not forget that ideas and methods vary from culture to culture and from generation to generation .
When parents listen to God , successful child - rearing does not become a matter of guesswork ; nor does it depend on human experience or human thinking .
By way of illustration , consider the example of Noah .
When Jehovah told him to build the ark , Noah could not rely on experience .
He had never built an ark before .
So he had to rely on Jehovah , doing “ just so ” ​ — that is , just as Jehovah directed .
The result ?
Noah got it right the first time . Indeed , he had to !
Noah also succeeded as a family man ​ — and for basically the same reason ; he trusted in God’s wisdom .
He thus taught his children well and set a fine example for them , which was a big challenge during that wicked pre - Flood era . ​ — Gen . 6 : 5 .
How important is parental example in training children ?
As parents , how can you do “ just so ” in God’s eyes ? Listen to Jehovah .
Let him instruct you in child - rearing by means of his Word and the guidance we receive through his organization .
In time , your children will likely thank you for doing that !
One brother wrote : “ I am filled with gratitude for the way my parents raised me .
They did their best to reach my heart .
Much of the credit for my spiritual advancement must go to them . ”
However , despite the parents ’ best efforts , some children leave Jehovah .
Nonetheless , parents who have tried their best to impress the truth on a child’s heart have a good conscience .
They can also hope that the wayward child will one day come “ home ” to Jehovah .
12 , 13 . ( a ) If a child is disfellowshipped , how do Christian parents show that they obey God ?
( b ) How did one family benefit from the parents ’ obedience to Jehovah ?

One of the greatest tests of obedience that some parents have involves their relationship with a disfellowshipped child .

Consider the example of a mother whose disfellowshipped daughter left home .
The mother admits : “ I looked for loopholes in our publications so that I could spend time with my daughter and my granddaughter . ”
She adds : “ But my husband kindly helped me to see that our child was now out of our hands and that we must not interfere . ”
Some years later , the daughter was reinstated .
“ Now she calls or texts me nearly every day ! ” the mother said .
“ And she deeply respects my husband and me because she knows that we obeyed God .
We have a wonderful relationship . ”
If you have a disfellowshipped child , will you “ trust in Jehovah with all your heart [ and ] not rely on your own understanding ” ?
Remember , Jehovah’s discipline reflects his matchless wisdom and love .
Never forget that he gave his Son for all , including your child . God wants no one to be destroyed .
( Read 2 Peter 3 : 9 . )
So have faith in Jehovah’s discipline and direction .
Do so even when it pains you , the parent , to do what Jehovah says .
Yes , work with God’s discipline , not against it .
How do we benefit from Jehovah’s instruction provided by means of “ the faithful steward ” ?
Jehovah has promised to care for , protect , and instruct the Christian congregation .
He does so in a number of ways .
For example , he has placed the congregation under the care of his Son , who appointed a “ faithful steward ” to provide timely spiritual food .
Made available in many ways , that food provides valuable instruction , or discipline .
Ask yourself , ‘ How often has a talk or an article in one of our journals moved me to make adjustments in my thinking or conduct ? ’
If you have responded positively , rejoice !
You are allowing Jehovah to mold , or discipline , you for your benefit . ​ — Prov . 2 : 1 - 5 .
15 , 16 . ( a ) How can we benefit from the “ gifts in men ” in the congregation ?
( b ) How can we make the elders ’ work more pleasant for them ?
Christ also gave to the congregation “ gifts in men ” ​ — elders to shepherd God’s flock .
How can we benefit from those precious gifts ?
One way is to imitate the faith of the elders as well as their fine example .
Another way is to heed their Scriptural counsel .
( Read Hebrews 13 : 7 , 17 . )
Remember , the elders love us and want us to grow spiritually .
For instance , if they notice that we are missing meetings or that our zeal is cooling off , they will no doubt quickly come to our aid .
They will listen to us and then try to build us up with warm encouragement and appropriate Scriptural counsel .
Do you view such help as an expression of Jehovah’s love for you ?
Keep in mind that elders may find that it is not easy to approach us with needed counsel .
Imagine , for example , how difficult it must have been for the prophet Nathan to speak to David after the king tried to cover up his gross sin !
Similarly , the apostle Paul no doubt had to muster up courage to provide correction when Peter , one of the 12 apostles , showed favoritism toward his Jewish brothers .
So how can you ease the load for the elders in your congregation ?
Be humble , approachable , and thankful .
See their help as an expression of God’s love for you .
This will not only benefit you but also add much joy to their work .
How did one sister benefit from the loving help of the elders in the congregation ?
Because of her past experience , one sister found it hard to love Jehovah .
“ When my past and other issues brought me to emotional exhaustion , ” she said , “ I knew that I had to talk with the elders .
They did not berate me or criticize me , but they encouraged me and strengthened me .
After every congregation meeting , no matter how busy they were , at least one of them would ask how I was .
Because of my past , I found it difficult to feel worthy of God’s love .
Time and time again , however , Jehovah has used the congregation and the elders to confirm his love for me .
I pray that I will never let him go . ”
18 , 19 .
What is worse than any pain that may result from discipline ?
Illustrate .
While discipline may be painful , there is something that is even more painful ​ — the harm that may result from rejecting discipline .
Consider two examples ​ — Cain and King Zedekiah .
When Cain developed a murderous hatred toward Abel , God admonished Cain : “ Why are you so angry and dejected ?
If you turn to doing good , will you not be restored to favor ?
But if you do not turn to doing good , sin is crouching at the door , and its craving is to dominate you ; but will you get the mastery over it ? ”
Cain did not listen .
Then sin overwhelmed him .
What needless pain and suffering Cain brought on himself !
The pain of Jehovah’s reprimand would have been mild by comparison .

A weak and wicked ruler , Zedekiah reigned during very dark days for Jerusalem .
The prophet Jeremiah repeatedly exhorted Zedekiah to leave his bad ways , but the king refused to be disciplined .
Again , the results were tragic .
How Jehovah wants to spare us from such needless suffering ! ​ — Read Isaiah 48 : 17 , 18 .
What does the future hold for those who accept God’s discipline and for those who refuse to accept it ?
In the world , discipline , including self - discipline , is often sneered at .

But that foolish attitude will soon catch up with the wicked .
So let us “ listen to discipline and become wise . ”
As Proverbs 4 : 13 states , “ hold on to discipline ; do not let it go .
Safeguard it , for it means your life . ”
3 The Way to True Freedom
8 Serve Jehovah , the God of Freedom
People around the world are demanding more freedom .
How should Christians view freedom ?
These two articles will consider what true freedom is , how we can attain it , and how to use our relative freedom now to benefit ourselves and others .

Above all , we will learn how to honor Jehovah , the God of true freedom .
13 Appointed Men ​ — Learn From Timothy
15 Imitating Jehovah ​ — A God Who Gives Encouragement
20 Encourage One Another “ All the More So ”
These articles show that Jehovah has always encouraged his servants and that they have followed his example throughout the ages .
We will see why it is more urgent than ever to give encouragement to one another .
25 Young People , Are You Focused on Spiritual Goals ?
Young people in the congregation benefit themselves if they focus on pleasing Jehovah .
This article gives reasons for setting spiritual goals early in life and for giving priority to the field ministry .
30 Questions From Readers
32 Questions From Readers
“ If the Son sets you free , you will be truly free . ” ​ — JOHN 8 : 36 .
SONGS : 54 , 36
What is relative freedom ?
How was true freedom lost ?

What freedom did Jesus promise , and how can we gain it ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What evidence is there that people are struggling to gain freedom ?
( b ) What have been the results of such struggles ?
TODAY , there is much talk about equality , liberty , and freedom .
People in many parts of the world want to be free from oppression , discrimination , and poverty .
Others demand to have freedom of speech , of choice , and of self - determination .
To be able to do what one wants to do or to live the way one wants to live seems to be much desired by people everywhere .
How to satisfy those desires , however , is quite another matter .
On the social or political level , many resort to protests , demonstrations , revolts , even revolutions .
But do such confrontations achieve the desired results ?
On the contrary , they often lead to tragedies and loss of life .
All of this once again testifies to the truthfulness of King Solomon’s inspired observation : “ Man has dominated man to his harm . ” ​ — Eccl . 8 : 9 .
What can we do to find true happiness and satisfaction ?
The Christian disciple James pointed out the key to finding true happiness and satisfaction .
He wrote : “ The one who peers into the perfect law that belongs to freedom and continues in it . . . will be happy in what he does . ”
Jehovah , who gave that perfect law , knows best the things humans need in order to be completely happy and satisfied .

He gave the first human couple everything that they needed to be happy ​ — including true freedom .
What freedom did Adam and Eve enjoy ?
( See opening picture . )
When reading the first two chapters of Genesis , we can easily see that Adam and Eve enjoyed the kind of freedom that people today can only hope for ​ — freedom from want , from fear , and from oppression .

The first couple’s life was completely free from worries about food , work , sickness , and death .
Does this mean that the freedom that Adam and Eve enjoyed was absolute ?
Let us see .
Contrary to what many think , what is needed for people to enjoy freedom ?
Many today think that to be truly free , they must be able to do anything and everything they want to do , regardless of the consequences .
The World Book Encyclopedia defines freedom as “ the ability to make choices and to carry them out . ”
However , it adds : “ From a legal point of view , people are free if society imposes no unjust , unnecessary , or unreasonable limits on them . ”
This implies that , in practice , certain limits are necessary so that everyone in that society can benefit from the freedom granted .
The question , then , is : Who has the right to determine what limits are just , necessary , and reasonable ?
( a ) Why does Jehovah alone possess absolute freedom ?
( b ) What sort of freedom can humans enjoy , and why ?
When it comes to freedom , a key point for us to bear in mind is that Jehovah God alone has what can be called absolute and unlimited freedom .
Why ?
Because he is the Creator of all things and the almighty Sovereign of the universe .
Recall the beautiful words of King David in describing the unique and lofty position that Jehovah alone occupies .
( Read 1 Chronicles 29 : 11 , 12 . )
Accordingly , all creatures in heaven and on earth have freedom in only a relative sense .
They must recognize that Jehovah God has the ultimate authority to impose what he determines to be just , necessary , and reasonable limits .
That , in fact , was what Jehovah God did with his human creation right from the beginning .
What are some instinctive actions that contribute to one’s happiness ?
Even though Adam and Eve initially enjoyed freedom in many ways , there were limits imposed on them .
Some of them were instinctive , but they were limits nonetheless .
For example , our first parents knew that to keep on living , they had to breathe , eat , sleep , and so on .
Would they feel a loss of freedom for having to do these things ?
No , for Jehovah saw to it that even in doing such routine things , they could find enjoyment and contentment .
Who would not delight in taking an invigorating breath of fresh air , eating his favorite food , or awakening from a restful night of sleep ?
We happily do these necessary things without any feeling of constraint or burden .
Adam and Eve no doubt felt the same .
What specific command did God give our first human parents , and for what purpose ?
Jehovah specifically commanded Adam and Eve to populate the earth and to take care of it .
Did this command in some way deprive them of their freedom ?
Of course not !
It was given to enable humans to participate in their Creator’s purpose ​ — to make the earth into a global paradise home for a race of perfect humans forever .
Today , it is not against Jehovah’s will for people to choose to be single or to be married but remain childless .
Still , by and large , people marry and raise children in spite of the challenges such choices bring .
Why ?
Because under normal circumstances , people find happiness and satisfaction in doing so .
Enjoying their marriage and family for all eternity could have been Adam and Eve’s happy lot in life .
Why was God’s command found at Genesis 2 : 17 not unjust , unnecessary , or unreasonable ?

Jehovah gave Adam and Eve another command , which included a clear statement of the penalty if violated : “ As for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad , you must not eat from it , for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die . ”
Was this command in any way unjust , unnecessary , or unreasonable ?
Did it rob Adam and Eve of their freedom ?
Certainly not .
In fact , a number of Bible scholars comment on the logic and good sense of the command .
For example , one scholar observes : “ The inference of God’s commands in [ Genesis 2 : 16 , 17 ] is that only God knows what is good . . . for humanity and only God knows what is not good . . . for them .
To enjoy the ‘ good , ’ humankind must trust God and obey him .
If they disobey , they will be left to decide for themselves what is good . . . and what is not good . ”
That is a burden that humans could not carry successfully on their own .
Adam and Eve’s choice proved disastrous !
( See paragraphs 9 - 12 )
Why should we not equate free will with the right to decide what is good and what is bad ?
Upon reading Jehovah’s command to Adam , many today would say that Adam was denied the freedom to do what he wanted .
In saying so , they are confusing the exercise of one’s free will with the right to decide what is good and what is bad .


Adam and Eve did have the freedom to choose whether they would obey God or not .
However , only Jehovah has the right to decide in the absolute sense what is good and what is bad , as symbolized by “ the tree of the knowledge of good and bad ” in the garden of Eden .
We have to admit that we do not always know what the outcome of our choices will be ; nor do we know whether they will turn out for our good every time .
That is why we so often see people make choices or decisions with all good intentions ​ — only to have them result in suffering , disaster , or tragedy .
Human limitations play a large role .
By means of his command , Jehovah lovingly taught Adam and Eve the way to exercise true freedom .

How is that so , and did that first couple respond ?
11 , 12 .
Why did Adam and Eve’s choice prove to be disastrous ?
Illustrate .

As it turned out , our first parents chose to disobey .
Satan’s tempting promise ​ — “ your eyes will be opened and you will be like God , knowing good and bad ” — ​ proved to be irresistible for Eve .
Did Adam and Eve’s choice eventually enhance their freedom in any way ?
Sadly , it did not .
Their choice did not bring them what Satan said it would .
In fact , they soon learned that rejecting Jehovah’s direction and going their own way resulted in disaster .
Why ? Simply because Jehovah did not give humans the freedom to determine for themselves what is good and what is bad . ​ — Read Proverbs 20 : 24 and footnote ; Jeremiah 10 : 23 .
This can be illustrated with a pilot flying an airplane .
To reach a certain destination safely , he usually must follow a preapproved flight path .
Modern aviation equipment allows a pilot to use onboard navigation instruments and to keep in touch with air traffic controllers along the way so as to reach his planned destination .
However , if the pilot chose to disregard that guidance and fly any route he desired , the result could be disastrous .
Like that pilot , Adam and Eve wanted to do things their own way .
They rejected the guidance God had provided .
The result ?
They ended , as it were , in a tragic crash , resulting in sin and death for themselves and for their future offspring .
In striving for self - determination , they lost the true freedom they had been given .
13 , 14 .
How can we gain true freedom ?
People may think that the more freedom they have , the better off they will be , but the reality is that having unbounded freedom is a two - edged sword .
True , freedom does bring many benefits ; yet , we shudder to imagine what the world would be like if there were no restraints at all .
For this reason , The World Book Encyclopedia states : “ The laws of every organized society form a complicated pattern of balanced freedoms and restrictions . ”
“ Complicated ” is surely the right word .
Just think of the volumes and volumes of laws written by man , let alone the armies of lawyers and judges needed to interpret and administer them .
In contrast , Jesus Christ pointed out a simple way to enjoy true freedom .
He said : “ If you remain in my word , you are really my disciples , and you will know the truth , and the truth will set you free . ”
Jesus ’ direction for gaining true freedom involves two requirements : First , accept the truth that he taught , and second , become his disciple .
Doing so will lead to true freedom .
But freedom from what ?
Jesus went on to explain : “ Every doer of sin is a slave of sin . . . .
If the Son sets you free , you will be truly free . ” ​ — John 8 : 34 , 36 .
Why can the freedom that Jesus promised make us “ truly free ” ?
Clearly , the freedom that Jesus promised his disciples is far superior to the social or political freedom that most people yearn for today .
When Jesus said : “ If the Son sets you free , you will be truly free , ” he was talking about liberation from the greatest bondage and oppression that humankind has ever experienced ​ — being “ a slave of sin . ”
Not only can sin lead us to doing what is bad but it can also prevent us from doing what we know is right or from living up to what we know we are capable of .
In that sense we are slaves of sin , and the outcome is frustration , pain , suffering , and finally death .

The apostle Paul felt this pain and agony deeply .
( Read Romans 7 : 21 - 25 . )
It is only when the shackles of sin are thrown off that we can hope to have the true freedom that our first human parents once enjoyed .
How can we become truly free ?
Jesus ’ statement “ if you remain in my word ” implies that there are certain requirements or boundaries for being set free by him .
As dedicated Christians , we have disowned ourselves and have chosen to live within the bounds of Christ’s teachings as his disciples .
Just as Jesus promised , we will be truly free when the benefits of his ransom sacrifice are fully applied to us .

( a ) What will give our life real meaning and satisfaction ?
( b ) What will we consider in the next article ?
Submitting to Jesus ’ teachings as his disciples will give our life real meaning and satisfaction .
This , in turn , opens up the prospect of being completely liberated from enslavement to sin and death .
( Read Romans 8 : 1 , 2 , 20 , 21 . )
The following article will consider how we can wisely use the freedom we now have , so that we can honor Jehovah , the God of true freedom , forever .
“ Where the spirit of Jehovah is , there is freedom . ” ​ — 2 COR . 3 : 17 .
SONGS : 49 , 73
In what ways has Jehovah’s spirit liberated us ?
How can we avoid misusing our God - given freedom ?
What can we do to make wise use of our freedom ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) Why were people in the apostle Paul’s day concerned with slavery and freedom ?

( b ) To whom did Paul direct people so that they could gain true freedom ?
PEOPLE of the Roman world , among whom the early Christians lived , prided themselves on being champions of law , justice , and freedom .
Yet , much of the power and glory of the Roman Empire was built on the backs of slaves .
At one point , some 30 percent of the population were slaves .
Undoubtedly , slavery and freedom were topics on the minds of the common people , including Christians .
The letters of the apostle Paul have much to say about freedom .


However , the objective of his ministry was not social or political reform , the very thing people of that day were seeking .
Rather than looking to any human ruler or agency for freedom , Paul and his fellow Christians worked hard to help others learn the good news of God’s Kingdom and the incomparable value of the ransom sacrifice of Christ Jesus .
Paul directed his fellow believers to the Source of true freedom .
In his second letter to the Corinthian Christians , for example , he clearly stated : “ Jehovah is the Spirit , and where the spirit of Jehovah is , there is freedom . ” ​ — 2 Cor . 3 : 17 .
3 , 4 . ( a ) What led up to Paul’s statement found at 2 Corinthians 3 : 17 ?
( b ) What must we do to enjoy the freedom that comes from Jehovah ?

Earlier in this letter to the Corinthians , Paul spoke of the glory of Moses when he descended from Mount Sinai after being in the presence of an angel of Jehovah .
Upon seeing Moses , the people became fearful , and Moses put a veil over his face .
“ But , ” Paul explained , “ when one turns to Jehovah , the veil is taken away . ”
What do Paul’s words mean ?
As we learned in the preceding article , Jehovah , the Creator of all things , is the only Person who enjoys absolute and unlimited freedom .
It stands to reason that in the presence of Jehovah and “ where the spirit of Jehovah is , ” there is freedom .
To enjoy and benefit from that freedom , however , we must ‘ turn to Jehovah , ’ that is , come into a personal relationship with him .
The Israelites in the wilderness did not view Jehovah’s dealings with them in a spiritual way .
It was as if their hearts and minds were veiled and hardened , focused only on using their newfound freedom from Egypt in a physical , or fleshly , way . ​ — Heb .
3 : 8 - 10 .
( a ) What sort of freedom does Jehovah’s spirit bring ?
( b ) How do we know that physical bondage need not diminish the freedom Jehovah provides ?
( c ) What questions do we need to answer ?
The freedom that is associated with the spirit of Jehovah , however , is more than liberation from physical slavery .

Far beyond what human efforts can hope to achieve , the spirit of Jehovah brings liberation from enslavement to sin and death , as well as from slavery to false worship and its practices .
What a glorious freedom that is !
A person can enjoy the benefits of such freedom even when imprisoned or enslaved .
This was certainly true of Sister Nancy Yuen and Brother Harold King , both of whom endured years of imprisonment for their faith .

You can see and hear them relate their experiences on JW Broadcasting .
( Look under INTERVIEWS AND EXPERIENCES > ENDURING TRIALS . )
We need to consider , though , how can we show that we treasure our freedom ?
And what can we do to make wise use of this freedom ?
How did the Israelites show a lack of appreciation for the freedom that Jehovah gave them ?
When we realize the true value of a costly gift , we are moved to show our gratitude to the giver .
The Israelites did not appreciate the freedom that Jehovah bestowed upon them when he delivered them from slavery in Egypt .
Within a few months of their deliverance , they began to long for the food and drink they once had in Egypt and complained about Jehovah’s provisions , even wanting to return to Egypt .
Just imagine , they put ‘ fish , cucumbers , watermelons , leeks , onions , and garlic ’ above their God - given freedom to worship the true God , Jehovah .
Is it any wonder that Jehovah became very angry with his people ?
What a lesson for us !
How did Paul act in harmony with his counsel found at 2 Corinthians 6 : 1 , and how can we do likewise ?
The apostle Paul urged all Christians not to take for granted the freedom that Jehovah has kindly given us through his Son , Jesus Christ .
( Read 2 Corinthians 6 : 1 . )
Recall the misery and pain of conscience that Paul suffered because of feeling captive to sin and death .

Yet , he gratefully declared : “ Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord ! ”
Why ?
He explained to his fellow Christians : “ For the law of the spirit that gives life in union with Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and of death . ”
Following Paul’s example , we too should never take for granted that Jehovah liberated us from the bondage of sin and of death .
By means of the ransom , we can serve our God with a clean conscience and find real delight in doing so . ​ — Ps .
40 : 8 .
Are you using your freedom of choice to advance the Kingdom work or your own interests ? ( See paragraphs 8 - 10 )
8 , 9 . ( a ) What warning did the apostle Peter give about using our freedom ?
( b ) What dangers confront us today ?
In addition to expressing gratitude , however , we should be mindful of never misusing our precious freedom .
The apostle Peter warned against using our freedom as an excuse for catering to our fleshly desires .
( Read 1 Peter 2 : 16 . )
Does that warning not remind you of what befell the Israelites in the wilderness ?


And the danger is still with us , perhaps even more so .
Satan and his world offer ever more alluring choices in dress and grooming , food and drink , recreation and entertainment , and a host of other things .
Clever advertisers often feature attractive people deceptively promoting as must - haves many things we really do not need .
How easy it is to fall prey to these ploys and to misuse our freedom !
The counsel by Peter also applies to more serious aspects of life , such as a person’s choice of education , employment , or career .
For example , young people in school today are under much pressure to qualify for enrollment in elite institutions of higher education .
They are led to believe that advanced education opens the door to high - paying and prestigious jobs , and statistics are often presented to show the gap in earnings between graduates from such institutions and those who completed only basic schooling .
Faced with choices that can deeply affect their entire life course , young people may find all of this very enticing .
What should they and their parents bear in mind ?
What do we need to bear in mind when exercising our freedom to make personal choices ?
Some individuals may feel that since choices in these matters are personal , they should have the freedom to choose what they please as long as their conscience permits it .
Perhaps they have in mind Paul’s words to the Corinthian Christians about food : “ Why should my freedom be judged by another person’s conscience ? ”
While it is true that we have the freedom to make personal choices regarding our education and career , we need to remember that our freedom is relative and that all decisions we make have consequences .
For that reason , Paul prefaced his statement with these words : “ All things are lawful [ or , “ permissible , ” ftn . ] , but not all things are advantageous .
All things are lawful , but not all things build up . ”
That certainly helps us to see that there are far more important factors to consider than our own preferences when it comes to exercising personal freedom in all aspects of our life .
For what purpose have we been set free ?
In his warning against the misuse of freedom , Peter also pointed out the objective .
He urged us to use our freedom “ as slaves of God . ”
Thus , the real purpose for which Jehovah , through Jesus , has freed us from the law of sin and of death is for us to live a life of dedication “ as slaves of God . ”
What example did Noah and his family set for us ?
The best way to protect ourselves from misusing our freedom and thus becoming enslaved again by worldly ambitions and desires is to be fully absorbed in spiritual pursuits .
Consider , for example , the patriarch Noah and his family .
They lived in a violent and immoral world .
Yet , they kept free from being entangled in the desires and pursuits of the people around them .
How did they manage to do that ?
They chose to keep busy in all that Jehovah had assigned them to do ​ — build the ark , store up food for themselves and the animals , and sound the warning to others .
“ Noah did according to all that God had commanded him .
He did just so . ” The result ?
Noah and his family survived the end of that world . ​ — Heb . 11 : 7 .
What commission did Jesus receive and in turn pass on to his followers ?
What has Jehovah commanded us to do today ?
As disciples of Jesus , we are well - acquainted with our God - given commission .
( Read Luke 4 : 18 , 19 . )
Today , the vast majority of people are still blinded by the god of this system of things and are in bondage ​ — religious , economic , and social .
It is our privilege to follow Jesus ’ example of helping people to come to know and worship Jehovah , the God of freedom .
That is not an easy work , and there are many challenges .
In some lands , people are becoming more indifferent , some even hostile .
The question that each of us should consider is , ‘ Can I use my freedom to give greater support to the Kingdom work ? ’
14 , 15 .
What kind of response to the preaching work is seen among Jehovah’s people ?
( See opening picture . )
It is most encouraging to see that many have sensed the urgency of our times and have simplified their lives so as to share in the full - time ministry .
Some of them serve within their local territories ; others move to where the need is greater .
Records show that in the last five years , the average number of regular pioneers has grown to over 1,100,000 and more than a quarter of a million worldwide have been added to the ranks of full - time preachers .
What a splendid result of making wise use of the freedom to serve Jehovah ! ​ — Ps .
110 : 3 .
What helped these brothers and sisters to make wise use of their freedom ?

Consider John and Judith , who for the past 30 years have served in a number of countries .
They recall that when the Pioneer Service School began in 1977 , the emphasis was placed on being willing to move and serve where the need was greater .
To keep their focus on this goal , John says that he changed jobs many times in order to maintain a simple lifestyle .


Eventually , when they arrived in a foreign country , they found that praying to Jehovah and relying on him helped them to overcome such obstacles as learning a new language , adjusting to a new culture , and enduring difficult climates .
How did those years of service affect them ?



“ I felt that I was immersed in the best activity I’ve ever known or experienced , ” John says .
“ Jehovah became more real to me , as a loving father would be .
Now I understood better what James 4 : 8 means : ‘ Draw close to God , and he will draw close to you . ’
I knew I had found what I was looking for , a satisfying purpose in life . ”
How have thousands with limited circumstances used their freedom wisely ?
Unlike John and Judith , others have circumstances that allow them to serve full - time for only a short period .
Nonetheless , many seize the opportunity to volunteer in theocratic construction projects around the world .
For example , when world headquarters was being built at Warwick , New York , some 27,000 brothers and sisters offered their services ​ — anywhere from two weeks to a year or longer .
Many of them put their life on hold to serve there .
What a wonderful example of using their God - given freedom to praise and honor Jehovah , the God of freedom !
What glorious future awaits those who now use their God - given freedom wisely ?

We are grateful that we have come to know Jehovah and can enjoy the freedom that true worship brings .
May we show by the choices we make that we treasure that freedom .
Instead of squandering or misusing it , let us use our freedom and the opportunities it brings to serve Jehovah to the fullest extent possible .
If we do so , we can look forward to enjoying the blessings Jehovah has promised when the words of this prophecy are fulfilled : “ The creation itself will also be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God . ” ​ — Rom . 8 : 21 .
WORLDWIDE last year , thousands of men were appointed as elders and ministerial servants among Jehovah’s Witnesses .
If you are one of those dear brothers , then surely you rejoice in your new privilege of service .
Understandably , though , you may also feel a little anxious .

Jason , a young elder , relates , “ When I was first appointed , I felt quite overwhelmed by my new responsibilities . ”
Moses and Jeremiah felt inadequate when they received new assignments from Jehovah .
If you have similar feelings , how can you overcome them and keep making progress ?
Consider the example of the Christian disciple Timothy . ​ — Acts 16 : 1 - 3 .
Timothy was probably in his late teens or early 20 ’ s when the apostle Paul invited him to become his traveling companion .
At first , being young , Timothy may have lacked self - confidence and may have hesitated to act in his newly assigned role .
Yet , a decade later , Paul could tell the congregation in Philippi : “ I am hoping in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you shortly . . .
For I have no one else of a disposition like his . ” ​ — Phil . 2 : 19 , 20 .
What made Timothy such an outstanding elder ?
Consider six lessons you can draw from his example .
He truly cared for people .
Paul told the brothers in Philippi : “ [ Timothy ] will genuinely care for your concerns . ”
Yes , Timothy cared about people .
He was genuinely interested in their spiritual welfare , and he willingly expended himself in their behalf .
Avoid being like the proverbial bus driver who is more concerned with arriving on time at every bus stop than with picking up passengers .

William , a respected elder for over 20 years , advises newly appointed men : “ Love the brothers .
Focus on their needs rather than on the administrative side of things . ”
He put spiritual interests first .
Contrasting Timothy’s example with that of others , Paul said : “ All the others are seeking their own interests , not those of Jesus Christ . ”
Paul was writing from Rome .
He observed that the brothers there were overly occupied with personal affairs .
To some degree , they were spiritually self - sparing .
But not Timothy !
When opportunities arose to advance the good news , his attitude was like that of Isaiah , who said : “ Here I am !
Send me ! ” ​ — Isa . 6 : 8 .
How can you balance your personal and spiritual obligations ?
First , prioritize .
“ Make sure of the more important things , ” urged Paul .
Make God’s priorities your priorities .
Second , simplify .
Eliminate time and energy stealers .
Paul exhorted Timothy : “ Flee from youthful desires , but pursue righteousness , faith , love , peace . ” ​ — 2 Tim .

2 : 22 . He worked hard in sacred service . Paul reminded the Philippians : “ You know the proof [ Timothy ] gave of himself , that like a child with a father he slaved with me to advance the good news . ”
Timothy was not lazy . He worked hard alongside Paul , and this strengthened the bonds of affection between them .
There is no shortage of work in God’s organization today .
That work is truly satisfying and can draw you closer to your brothers and sisters .
So make it your aim always to have “ plenty to do in the work of the Lord . ” ​ — 1 Cor .
15 : 58 .
He applied the lessons he learned .
Paul wrote to Timothy : “ You have closely followed my teaching , my course of life , my purpose , my faith , my patience , my love , my endurance . ”

Because Timothy applied what he learned , he qualified for greater responsibility . ​ — 1 Cor . 4 : 17 .
Do you have a spiritual mentor ?
If not , why not seek one out ?
Tom , an elder for many years , recalls : “ An experienced elder took me under his wing and gave me excellent training .
I regularly asked for and applied his advice .
This rapidly built up my confidence . ”
He kept training himself .
Paul exhorted Timothy : “ Train yourself with godly devotion as your aim . ”
An athlete may have a coach , but he also needs to train himself .
Paul urged Timothy : “ Continue applying yourself to public reading , to exhortation , to teaching . . . .
Ponder over these things ; be absorbed in them , so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people . ” ​ — 1 Tim .
4 : 13 - 15 . You too need to keep honing your skills .
Do not let your spirituality stagnate or your understanding of congregation procedures go out - of - date .
Also , avoid becoming overconfident ​ — perhaps thinking that you have so much experience that you can handle any situation without doing careful research .
In imitation of Timothy , “ pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching . ” ​ — 1 Tim .
4 : 16 . He relied on Jehovah’s spirit .
Reflecting on Timothy’s ministry , Paul reminded him : “ Guard this fine trust by means of the holy spirit , which is dwelling in us . ”
To safeguard his ministry , Timothy needed to rely on God’s spirit .
Donald , an elder for many decades , observes : “ Appointed men must cherish their relationship with God .
Those who do will go ‘ from strength to strength . ’
If they pray for God’s spirit and cultivate its fruitage , they will be a real blessing to their brothers . ” ​ — Ps .
84 : 7 ; 1 Pet . 4 : 11 .
It is very encouraging to see so many newly appointed brothers , like you , making spiritual progress .
Jason , mentioned at the outset , says : “ During the time that I’ve been an elder , I’ve learned a lot and my confidence has grown .
Now I really enjoy my assignment and view it as a wonderful privilege ! ”
Will you keep making spiritual progress ?
Make it your aim to learn from Timothy .
Then you too will be a blessing to God’s people .
Because we offer our Bible - based material without charge , some feel that copying and posting it on other websites or on social media is acceptable .
However , doing so violates the Terms of Use * for our websites and has caused serious problems .
As is clearly stated in those Terms , no one is permitted to “ post artwork , electronic publications , trademarks , music , photos , videos , or articles from this website on the Internet ( any website , file - sharing site , video - sharing site , or social network ) . ”
Why is such a restriction needed ?
No one may post our copyrighted publications on other Internet sites
All the material on our websites is copyrighted .
Apostates and other opposers try to use our publications on their websites to lure in Jehovah’s Witnesses and others .
Planted in those sites is material designed to sow doubts in readers ’ minds .
Others have used material from our publications or our jw.org logo in advertisements , on products offered for sale , and in mobile device apps .

By securing copyright and trademark protection , we have a legal basis to prevent such misuse .
But if we knowingly allow people , even our brothers , to post our digital content on other sites or to use the jw.org trademark to sell merchandise , the courts may not support our efforts to deter opposers and commercial enterprises .
Downloading our publications from anywhere but jw.org is potentially dangerous .
Jehovah has entrusted the responsibility of providing spiritual food to “ the faithful and discreet slave ” alone .
That “ slave ” uses only its official websites to publish spiritual food ​ — www.jw.org , tv.jw.org , and wol.jw.org .
And we have only three official apps for mobile devices ​ — JW Language , JW Library , and JW Library Sign Language .
We can trust these products to be free of advertisements or contamination by Satan’s world .
If the spiritual food passes through other channels , there is no guarantee that it has not been altered or contaminated . ​ — Ps . 18 : 26 ; 19 : 8 .
Furthermore , posting our publications on websites that allow comments provides a place for apostates and other critics to sow distrust of Jehovah’s organization .
Some brothers have been drawn into online debates and thus have brought added reproach on Jehovah’s name .

An online forum is not an appropriate setting for “ instructing with mildness those not favorably disposed . ”
It has also been observed that fraudulent social media accounts and websites have been created in the name of the organization , the Governing Body , and its individual members .
However , no member of the Governing Body maintains a personal Web page or a presence on any social media site .
Directing people to jw.org helps to spread the “ good news . ”

The digital tools we receive for use in our personal ministry are continually being improved .
We would like everyone to benefit from them .
Therefore , as the Terms of Use indicates , you may e - mail someone an electronic copy of a publication or share a link to material found on jw.org .
By directing interested people to our official websites , we are connecting them with the one true source of spiritual food , “ the faithful and discreet slave . ”
A link to the Terms of Use can be found at the bottom of the home page on jw.org , and the restrictions apply to everything that is available on our websites .
© 2017 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
A special pioneer couple preach in a remote area near the city of Balykchy
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2017 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .

“ Praised be the God . . . who encourages us in all our trials . ” ​ — 2 COR . 1 : 3 , 4 , ftn .
SONGS : 7 , 3
How has Jehovah proved to be a God who gives encouragement ?
How did Jesus show himself to be encouraging ?
How did the apostles encourage their brothers ?
What encouragement did Jehovah give at the time of the rebellion in Eden ?
EVER since humankind fell into sin and imperfection , Jehovah has proved that he is a God who gives encouragement .
Immediately after the rebellion in Eden , he gave Adam’s future descendants reason to take courage . All was not lost for the human family .
Once understood , the prophetic promise written at Genesis 3 : 15 would give humankind hope that eventually “ the original serpent , ” Satan the Devil , and all his evil works would be destroyed . ​ — Rev .
12 : 9 ; 1 John 3 : 8 .
How did Jehovah encourage Noah ?

Jehovah’s servant Noah lived in an ungodly world where the only people who worshipped Jehovah were members of his family .
With violence and sexual perversion rampant all around him , Noah could have become discouraged .
But Jehovah gave him information that infused him with the courage he needed to persevere in his efforts to ‘ walk with God . ’
Jehovah told Noah that He was going to put an end to that wicked world and instructed him about what he must do to ensure his family’s safety .
Jehovah proved to be for Noah a God of encouragement .
What encouragement did Joshua receive ?
( See opening picture . )
Later , Joshua had the daunting task of settling God’s people in the Promised Land .
This involved conquering powerful armies of the nations that occupied the territory . Joshua had every reason to be apprehensive .
Knowing this , Jehovah instructed Moses to reassure Joshua .
God said : “ Commission Joshua and encourage him and strengthen him , because he is the one who will cross over before this people and he is the one who will cause them to inherit the land that you will see . ”
Before Joshua went into action , Jehovah encouraged him , saying : “ Have I not commanded you ?
Be courageous and strong .
Do not be struck with terror or fear , for Jehovah your God is with you wherever you go . ”
What reassuring encouragement !
4 , 5 . ( a ) What encouragement did Jehovah give to his ancient people ?
( b ) How did Jehovah encourage his Son ?
Not only did Jehovah encourage individuals but he also gave words of encouragement to his people as a group .
In prophetic terms that would prove to be of comfort to the Jews held captive in Babylon , Jehovah stated : “ Do not be afraid , for I am with you .

Do not be anxious , for I am your God .
I will fortify you , yes , I will help you , I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness . ”
The early Christians had the same assurance , and so do God’s people today . ​ — Read 2 Corinthians 1 : 3 , 4 .
Jesus himself received encouragement from his Father .
At his baptism , Jesus heard a voice from heaven say : “ This is my Son , the beloved , whom I have approved . ”
How those words must have strengthened Jesus throughout his earthly ministry !
How does the parable of the talents provide encouragement ?
Jesus imitated his Father’s example .
The parable of the talents , given in Jesus ’ prophecy about the conclusion of the system of things , encourages faithfulness .
The master honored each of the faithful slaves with the words : “ Well done , good and faithful slave !
You were faithful over a few things .
I will appoint you over many things . Enter into the joy of your master . ”
What strong encouragement to continue serving Jehovah faithfully !
What encouragement did Jesus give to his apostles and to Peter in particular ?
Jesus ’ apostles often quarreled over who was the greatest among them , but Jesus patiently encouraged them to humble themselves and to become servants , not bosses .

Peter in particular disappointed Jesus several times .

Rather than reject Peter , Jesus encouraged him and even commissioned him to strengthen his brothers . ​ — John 21 : 16 .
How did Hezekiah encourage the military chiefs and the people of Judah ?
Even before Jehovah’s Son came to earth and set a perfect example of how to impart encouragement , faithful servants of Jehovah were conscious of the need to be encouraging .
When threatened by the Assyrians , Hezekiah assembled the military chiefs and the people of Judah to encourage them .
“ And the people were strengthened by [ his ] words . ” ​ — Read 2 Chronicles 32 : 6 - 8 .
What does the book of Job teach us about giving encouragement ?

Although in need of consolation himself , Job gave his three “ troublesome comforters ” a lesson in giving encouragement .
He told them that if he had been in their place , he ‘ would have strengthened them with the words of his mouth , and the consolation of his lips would have brought them relief . ’
Finally , Job received encouragement from Elihu and from Jehovah himself . ​ — Job 33 : 24 , 25 ; 36 : 1 , 11 ; 42 : 7 , 10 .
10 , 11 . ( a ) Why did Jephthah’s daughter need to be encouraged ?
( b ) Who today deserve similar encouragement ?
Another example in ancient times of someone in need of encouragement is Jephthah’s daughter .
Before going out to combat the Ammonites , Judge Jephthah vowed that if Jehovah gave him the victory , the first person who would come out to meet him after the battle would be devoted to Jehovah’s service at the sanctuary .
It so happened that it was his daughter , his only child , who came out to celebrate his victory with him .
Jephthah’s heart was broken .
But he kept his vow and sent his virgin daughter to Shiloh to serve at the tabernacle for the rest of her life . ​ — Judg .
11 : 30 - 35 .
However hard this was on Jephthah , it may have been harder still on his daughter , who willingly complied with her father’s decision .
She thus relinquished the right to marry , to have children , and to preserve the family name and inheritance .
If anyone , then , needed comfort and encouragement , she did .



The Bible account states : “ It became a custom in Israel : From year to year , the young women of Israel would go to give commendation to the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in the year . ”
Do not unmarried Christians who use their singleness to give greater attention to “ the things of the Lord ” also deserve commendation and encouragement ? ​ — 1 Cor . 7 : 32 - 35 .
12 , 13 .
How did Peter ‘ strengthen his brothers ’ ?
On the night before his death , Jesus told the apostle Peter : “ Simon , Simon , look !
Satan has demanded to have all of you to sift you as wheat .
But I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out ; and you , once you have returned , strengthen your brothers . ” ​ — Luke 22 : 31 , 32 .
The apostles ’ letters did much to encourage the congregations in the first century , and they build us up to this day ( See paragraphs 12 - 17 )
Peter proved to be a pillar in the early Christian congregation .
He encouraged his brothers by his courageous example at Pentecost and thereafter .
Toward the end of his long ministry , he wrote to fellow Christians .
Explaining why , he stated : “ I have written you in few words in order to encourage you and to give an earnest witness that this is the true undeserved kindness of God .
Stand firm in it . ”
Peter’s inspired letters have continued to be a source of encouragement to Christians throughout the ages and up to this day . How we need this encouragement as we await the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises ! ​ — 2 Pet . 3 : 13 .
14 , 15 .
How have the inspired writings of the apostle John been a source of encouragement for Christians throughout the centuries ?
The apostle John was also a pillar in the early Christian congregation .
His riveting Gospel account of Jesus ’ ministry has been a source of encouragement to Christians throughout the centuries ​ — and still is .
His Gospel alone preserves Jesus ’ statement that love is the identifying mark of his true disciples . ​ — Read John 13 : 34 , 35 .
John’s three letters contain further gems of truth .

When we are weighed down with the burden of sin , are we not relieved to read that “ the blood of Jesus . . . cleanses us from all sin ” ?
And if our heart continues to condemn us , do we not get a lump in our throat and tears of gratitude in our eyes when we read that “ God is greater than our hearts ” ?
John alone wrote that “ God is love . ”
His second and third letters commend Christians who continue “ walking in the truth . ” ​ — 2 John 4 ; 3 John 3 , 4 .
16 , 17 .
What encouragement did the apostle Paul give the early Christians ?
In the first century , perhaps the apostle who did the most to encourage his brothers was the apostle Paul .
It appears that in the early days of Christianity , most of the apostles remained in Jerusalem , which continued to be the location of the governing body .
Christians in Judea preached Christ to people who because of the influence of Judaism believed in one God .
On the other hand , the apostle Paul was sent by the holy spirit to preach to the people of the nations of the Greco - Roman world , who worshipped many gods . ​ — Gal .
2 : 7 - 9 ; 1 Tim . 2 : 7 .
Paul traveled far and wide in what is now Turkey , as well as in Greece and Italy , establishing Christian congregations among non - Jews .

These newly converted Christians “ suffered at the hands of [ their ] own countrymen ” and needed encouragement .
About the year 50 C.E . , Paul wrote to the young congregation in Thessalonica : “ We always thank God when we mention all of you in our prayers , for we continually remember your faithful work , your loving labor , and your endurance . ”

He also exhorted them to strengthen one another , saying : “ Keep encouraging one another and building one another up . ” ​ — 1 Thess .
5 : 11 . How did the first - century governing body encourage Philip ?
The first - century governing body proved to be a source of encouragement both to those taking the lead and to Christians in general .
When Philip the evangelizer preached about Christ to the Samaritans , he received the full backing of those on the governing body .
They sent two of their number , Peter and John , to pray for the new believers to receive holy spirit .
How Philip himself as well as those he had converted must have been encouraged by this support from the governing body !
What effect did the letter sent by the governing body have on the early Christian congregation ?
Later , the governing body was called upon to decide whether non - Jewish Christians should be required to submit to circumcision , as had been required of Jews by the Law of Moses .
Under the guidance of the holy spirit and after reasoning on the Scriptures , the responsible brothers decided that this was no longer necessary , and they wrote a letter to the congregations to that effect .
Representatives of the governing body were sent out to the congregations to deliver the letter .

The result ?
“ After reading it , they rejoiced over the encouragement . ” ​ — Acts 15 : 27 - 32 .
( a ) What encouragement does the Governing Body today give to the international brotherhood ?
( b ) What question will be answered in the following article ?
Today , the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses gives encouragement to Bethel family members , to special full - time field workers , and indeed , to the entire international brotherhood of true Christians .
And the result is the same as in the first century ​ — rejoicing over the encouragement !
In addition , in 2015 the Governing Body published the brochure Return to Jehovah , which has proved to be a rich source of encouragement to many throughout the world .
But is it only those in authority who should imitate Jehovah in giving encouragement ?
The answer to that question will be found in the following article .
“ Let us consider one another . . . , encouraging one another , and all the more so as you see the day drawing near . ” ​ — HEB .
10 : 24 , 25 .
SONGS : 90 , 87
Why did the apostle Paul use the expression “ all the more so ” when he instructed Christians to encourage one another ?
Who are in need of encouragement today ?
Who can encourage fellow Christians ?
Why did the apostle Paul exhort the early Hebrew Christians to encourage one another “ all the more so ” ?
WHY should we intensify our efforts to be encouraging ?
The apostle Paul gives us the reason in his letter to Hebrew Christians .
He told them : “ Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works , not forsaking our meeting together , as some have the custom , but encouraging one another , and all the more so as you see the day drawing near . ”
Within just five years , Jewish Christians living in Jerusalem would see a “ day of Jehovah ” approaching and recognize the sign Jesus had given them to flee for their lives from that city .


That day of Jehovah arrived in 70 C.E . when the Romans executed Jehovah’s judgment on Jerusalem .
Why should we today be increasingly concerned about encouraging one another ?
Today , we have every reason to believe that the “ great and very awe - inspiring ” day of Jehovah is near .
The prophet Zephaniah said : “ The great day of Jehovah is near !
It is near and it is approaching very quickly ! ”
That prophetic warning also applies to our time .
In view of the proximity of Jehovah’s day , Paul tells us to “ be concerned about one another so as to incite to love and fine works . ”
We should , therefore , be increasingly interested in our brothers , so that we can encourage them whenever needed .
What did the apostle Paul state about encouragement ?
( See opening picture . )
“ Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down , but a good word cheers it up . ”
This is true of all of us .
We all need a word of encouragement from time to time .
Paul showed that even one who has the responsibility of encouraging others needs to be built up himself .
To Christians living in Rome , he wrote : “ I am longing to see you , that I may impart some spiritual gift to you for you to be made firm ; or , rather , that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith , both yours and mine . ”
Yes , Paul , who gave outstanding encouragement to others , at times needed to be built up himself . ​ — Read Romans 15 : 30 - 32 .
4 , 5 .
Whom can we encourage today , and why ?
Those who live a life of self - sacrifice should be commended .
Among these are the faithful pioneers .
Many have made great sacrifices in order to make room in their lives for the pioneer service .
The same is true of missionaries , Bethelites , circuit overseers and their wives , and those who work in remote translation offices .
All of these make sacrifices in their lives in order to devote more time to sacred service .
They , therefore , ought to receive encouragement .
And those whose heart is still in the full - time service but who for various reasons have had to limit their activity also appreciate receiving encouragement .
Brothers and sisters who remain single because they want to obey the admonition to marry “ only in the Lord ” make up another group that merits encouragement .
Likewise , hardworking wives appreciate hearing upbuilding words from their husbands .
Also , Christians who remain faithful through persecution or illness need to hear encouragement .
Jehovah and Christ comfort all these faithful servants . ​ — Read 2 Thessalonians 2 : 16 , 17 .
What is the role of the elders as described at Isaiah 32 : 1 , 2 ?
Read Isaiah 32 : 1 , 2 .
Jesus Christ , through his anointed brothers and supportive “ princes ” of the other sheep , provides encouragement and guidance to despondent and discouraged ones in this time of need .
That is as it should be , for these elders are not “ masters ” over the faith of others but “ are fellow workers ” for the joy of their brothers . ​ — 2 Cor . 1 : 24 .
7 , 8 .
In addition to sharing words of encouragement , how can the elders build others up ?
The apostle Paul set an example to be imitated .
He wrote to the persecuted Christians in Thessalonica : “ Having tender affection for you , we were determined to impart to you , not only the good news of God but also our very selves , because you became so beloved to us . ” ​ — 1 Thess .
2 : 8 .


Showing that just a word of encouragement does not always suffice , Paul told the elders from Ephesus : “ You must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus , when he himself said : ‘ There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving . ’ ”
Paul was willing not only to encourage his brothers but also to “ spend and be completely spent for ” them .
Similarly , elders should not only encourage and console their brothers with words but also build them up by showing sincere personal interest . ​ — 1 Cor .
14 : 3 . How can the elders give counsel in an encouraging way ?
Building one another up may involve giving counsel , but here again , elders should follow the example given in the Bible about how to give counsel in an encouraging way .
An outstanding example in this respect was given by Jesus himself after his death and resurrection .
He had some firm counsel to give to certain congregations in Asia Minor , but notice how he went about it .
Before giving them counsel , he gave warm commendation to the congregations in Ephesus , Pergamum , and Thyatira .
He told the congregation in Laodicea : “ All those for whom I have affection , I reprove and discipline .
So be zealous and repent . ”
Elders would do well to imitate Christ’s example when they need to give counsel .
Parents , are you training your children to encourage others ? ( See paragraph 10 )
How can all of us share in building one another up ?
Being encouraging is not the exclusive responsibility of the elders .
Paul exhorted all Christians to speak “ what is good for building up as the need may be , to impart what is beneficial ” to others .

Each of us should be alert to observe “ the need ” that others have .
Paul counseled Hebrew Christians : “ Strengthen the hands that hang down and the feeble knees , and keep making straight paths for your feet , so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but , rather , may be healed . ”
All of us , including young ones , can build one another up by words of encouragement .
How was Marthe helped during a period of depression ?
Marthe , * a sister who went through a period of depression , writes : “ One day when I was praying for encouragement , I met an older sister who showed me affection and compassion , which I was in particular need of at the time .
She also shared with me her own experience with the kind of test I was going through , and I felt less alone . ”


Possibly , the older sister did not realize the good effect that her words would have on Marthe .
12 , 13 .
In what positive ways can we apply the advice given at Philippians 2 : 1 - 4 ?

Paul gave this advice to all the members of the congregation in Philippi : “ If , then , there is any encouragement in Christ , if any consolation of love , if any spiritual fellowship , if any tender affection and compassion , make my joy full by being of the same mind and having the same love , being completely united , having the one thought in mind .
Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism , but with humility consider others superior to you , as you look out not only for your own interests , but also for the interests of others . ” ​ — Phil .
2 : 1 - 4 .
Yes , all of us should endeavor to look out for the interests of others , offering a “ consolation of love , ” “ spiritual fellowship , ” and “ tender affection and compassion ” to encourage our brothers and sisters .
What can be a source of encouragement ?
News of faithfulness on the part of those we have helped in the past can be a real source of encouragement , as it was for the apostle John , who wrote : “ No greater joy do I have than this : that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth . ”
Many pioneers can attest to how encouraging it is for them to learn that some of those they helped into the truth years ago are staying faithful and perhaps are even serving as pioneers .
Simply reminding a discouraged pioneer of past joys can be a real source of comfort .
What is one way that we can encourage those who are serving faithfully ?
Many circuit overseers have stated how encouraged they and their wives felt after receiving even a short note of gratitude for their visit to a congregation .
The same can be true of elders , missionaries , pioneers , and Bethel family members who receive a word of appreciation for their faithful service .
What does it take to encourage someone ?
It would be an error on our part if we believed that we cannot be encouraging because we are not particularly communicative .
It does not take much to be a source of encouragement ​ — perhaps no more than a warm smile when greeting someone .
If there is no smile in return , it could mean that there is a problem , and just listening to the other person may bring comfort . ​ — Jas .
1 : 19 .
How was one young brother helped during a time of distress ?
Henri , a young brother , was greatly distressed when his close relatives , including his father , who had been a respected elder , left the truth .
Henri was encouraged by a circuit overseer who took him to a café for a cup of coffee and allowed him to open his heart .

Henri realized that the only way to help his family come back to the truth was for him to persevere faithfully .
He found great comfort in reading Psalm 46 ; Zephaniah 3 : 17 ; and Mark 10 : 29 , 30 .
All of us can build up and encourage one another ( See paragraph 18 )
( a ) What observation did King Solomon make ?
( b ) What suggestion did the apostle Paul make ?
The examples of Marthe and Henri show that we can be encouraging to a brother or a sister who is in need of comfort .
King Solomon wrote : “ A word spoken at the right time ​ — how good it is !
A cheerful glance makes the heart rejoice ; a good report invigorates the bones . ”

Additionally , reading from The Watchtower or our website can invigorate someone who is downcast .
Paul shows that singing a Kingdom song together can be a source of encouragement .
He wrote : “ Keep on teaching and encouraging one another with psalms , praises to God , spiritual songs sung with gratitude , singing in your hearts to Jehovah . ” ​ — Col .
3 : 16 ; Acts 16 : 25 .
Why will mutual encouragement become more and more important in the days ahead , and what should we do ?

Mutual encouragement will become more and more important as we see Jehovah’s day “ drawing near . ”
As Paul said to fellow Christians of his day , “ keep encouraging one another and building one another up , just as you are in fact doing . ” ​ — 1 Thess . 5 : 11 .
Names have been changed .
“ Commit to Jehovah whatever you do , and your plans will succeed . ” ​ — PROV .
16 : 3 .
SONGS : 135 , 144
How can young ones benefit from applying Proverbs 16 : 3 ?
What goals can young people work toward ?
What will help youths not to be distracted ?
1 - 3 . ( a ) What challenge confronts all young people , and how might this be illustrated ?
( See opening picture . ) ( b ) How can Christian youths best meet this challenge ?
SUPPOSE you plan to travel to a distant town for an important event .
Getting there requires a long journey by bus .
At the bus station , you are overwhelmed by crowds of passengers and many buses .
How good it is that you have your goal clearly in mind ​ — finding the bus that is going to your chosen destination !
Boarding a bus going anywhere else would mean that you would head in the wrong direction .
Young people today might be likened to those passengers .
Adolescents face a long journey , not by bus , but in life .
At times they may feel overwhelmed by the opportunities and decisions that confront them .
Youths , you can make it easier for yourselves if you have a good idea where you want to go in life .
Where should you be headed ?
This article answers that question by encouraging youths to focus their life on their desire to please Jehovah .
That means including Jehovah in all aspects of life ​ — education , employment , family responsibilities , and so on .
And it means reaching out for spiritual goals .
Young people who keep focused on serving Jehovah can be sure of his blessing in making a success of life . ​ — Read Proverbs 16 : 3 .
What will we examine in this article ?
Setting theocratic goals early in life makes good sense .
Why ?
We will examine three reasons .
The first two show that working on spiritual goals strengthens a person’s relationship with Jehovah ; the third highlights the benefit of aiming for theocratic targets early in life .

What is the primary reason for setting spiritual goals ?
The primary reason for setting spiritual goals is to show Jehovah how grateful we are for his love and for what he has done for us .
The psalmist observed : “ It is good to give thanks to Jehovah . . .
For you have made me rejoice , O Jehovah , because of your deeds ; because of the works of your hands I shout joyfully . ”
As a young person , think of all you owe to Jehovah .
Your life , your faith , the Bible , the congregation , and your wonderful hope for the future .
Giving priority to spiritual matters is a way of showing gratitude to God for these blessings , and that brings you closer to him .
( a ) What effect do spiritual goals have on our relationship with Jehovah ?
( b ) What goals can be set at an early age ?
The second reason is that once you start working toward spiritual goals , you begin building a record of good works in Jehovah’s eyes .
This brings you even closer to him .
The apostle Paul promised : “ God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name . ”
You are never too young to set goals .
Christine was ten years old when she made up her mind to read regularly the life stories of faithful Witnesses .
At 12 years of age , Toby set the goal of reading the entire Bible before his baptism .

Maxim was 11 years old and his sister Noemi was one year younger when they got baptized .
Both then began working toward the goal of Bethel service .
To help themselves keep focused , they put a Bethel application up on a wall in their home .
Why not consider which goals are important to you and then start working toward them ? ​ — Read Philippians 1 : 10 , 11 .
7 , 8 . ( a ) How can setting goals make decision - making easier ?
( b ) Why did one teenager choose not to go to a university ?
The third reason for setting goals early in life has to do with decision - making .
Adolescents have to make decisions about education , employment , and other matters .
Making decisions is like choosing the right road when you come to an intersection .
As long as you know the way to your destination , choosing the right road presents no problem .
In the same way , if you know what your goals are , making good decisions becomes easier .
Proverbs 21 : 5 says : “ The plans of the diligent surely lead to success . ”
The earlier you make plans by setting good goals , the sooner you will have success .
That is what Damaris experienced when she faced an important decision as a teenager .
Damaris finished her basic schooling with top grades .
She could have accepted a scholarship to study law at a university , but she chose instead to work in a bank .
Why ?
“ I made up my mind very early on to pioneer .
That meant working part - time .


With a university degree in law , I could have earned a lot of money , but I would have had little chance of finding part - time work . ”
Damaris has now been a pioneer for 20 years .
Does she feel that she set the right goal and made the correct decision as a teenager ?

“ At my workplace in the bank , I now have much contact with lawyers .
They do the sort of work I would be doing had I studied law .
Many , though , are very unhappy with their jobs .
My decision to pioneer helped me sidestep frustration in a secular career and opened the way for years of joy in Jehovah’s service . ”
Why do our young people deserve warm praise ?

Thousands of young ones in congregations all over the world deserve warm praise .
They commit themselves to Jehovah and focus their lives on theocratic goals .
Such young people enjoy life to the full while at the same time learning to follow Jehovah’s guidance in all endeavors .
These include education , employment , and family life .
“ Trust in Jehovah with all your heart , ” wrote Solomon .
“ In all your ways take notice of him , and he will make your paths straight . ”
Youths in the Christian congregation are precious in the eyes of Jehovah , who loves them dearly and gives them his protection , guidance , and blessing .
( a ) Why must the ministry be high on our list of priorities ?
( b ) How can we become effective in the ministry ?
A young person who focuses his life on the desire to please Jehovah gives special attention to the ministry .
Jesus Christ stressed that “ the good news has to be preached first . ”
Because the preaching work is so urgent , it should be high on our list of priorities .
Could you set the goal of sharing in the ministry more often ?
Could you pioneer ?
But what if you find little joy in preaching ?
And how can you be more effective at giving a witness ?
Two basic steps will help : Prepare well , and do not give up sharing what you know with others .
It might surprise you how much joy you will then find when preaching .

How do you prepare to give a witness ?
( See paragraphs 11 , 12 )
11 , 12 . ( a ) What can young ones do to prepare to give a witness ?
( b ) How did one youth use an opportunity to give a witness at school ?
You could start by working out an answer to a question commonly raised by schoolmates , such as “ Why do you believe in God ? ”
Our jw.org website contains articles designed to help young people work out for themselves how to answer that question .
Look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > TEENAGERS .
There you will find a worksheet entitled “ Why Do I Believe in God ? ”
The worksheet will guide you in preparing your own answer .
It provides three scriptures you can use when explaining your conviction ​ — Hebrews 3 : 4 , Romans 1 : 20 , and Psalm 139 : 14 .
Using these worksheets , you can prepare an answer to one question after another . ​ — Read 1 Peter 3 : 15 .
As you have opportunity , encourage your schoolmates to look up jw.org for themselves .

That is what Luca did .
His class was discussing different religions , and Luca noticed that the textbook contained some wrong ideas about Jehovah’s Witnesses .
Although he felt hesitant , he asked permission to correct these false claims , and the teacher agreed .
Not only did Luca explain his beliefs but he also showed our website to the whole class .
For homework the teacher asked each pupil to view the whiteboard animation Beat a Bully Without Using Your Fists .
Luca was thrilled to be able to give a good witness .
Why should we not give up when difficulties arise ?
Do not lose heart , even if the road you travel gets bumpy at times .
When difficulties arise , stick to your goals .


Katharina was 17 years old when she made it her goal to witness to each colleague at work .
One person insulted her several times , but she refused to be intimidated .
Her fine conduct in the face of difficulties impressed another colleague named Hans .
As a result , he read our publications , studied the Bible , and got baptized .
Katharina had moved away and did not know all of this .
Imagine her joy when 13 years later she was sitting in the Kingdom Hall with her family and Hans was introduced as the visiting speaker !
How good that Katharina did not give up on her goal to witness to her workmates !


14 , 15 . ( a ) When under pressure , what should youths keep in mind ?
( b ) How can youths combat peer pressure ?
So far this article has encouraged you to make up your mind to focus your life on your desire to serve Jehovah . This means centering your life on spiritual goals .
Other youths of your age probably center their lives on having a good time , and they will likely invite you to join them .
Sooner or later you will need to show how determined you are to stick to the choices you have made .
Do not be distracted by peer pressure .
After all , thinking again of the bus illustration , you surely would not board a bus going just anywhere simply because the passengers on that bus appear to be having a good time .
There are a number of ways to combat peer pressure .
For instance , avoid situations that are known to be tempting .
And remind yourself of the painful consequences of joining others in bad behavior .
A further help is to admit your own need for advice .
Humility will allow you to be open to suggestions from your parents and spiritually mature ones in the congregation . ​ — Read 1 Peter 5 : 5 , 6 .
Relate an experience showing the benefits of humility .
Humility moved Christoph to accept good advice .

Shortly after he got baptized , he began training regularly at a fitness center .
Other young people at the center urged him to join their sports club .

He spoke about the matter to an elder , who asked Christoph to think about certain dangers before making a decision , such as the risk of getting infected by the spirit of competition .
Christoph joined the club anyway .
In time , however , he discovered that the sport was violent , even dangerous .
Again he spoke to several elders , all of whom gave him Scriptural advice . “ Jehovah sent me good advisers , and I listened to Him , even if it took some time . ”
Are you humble enough to accept sound advice ?
17 , 18 . ( a ) What does Jehovah want for young people today ?
( b ) What sad situation may arise in adulthood , and how can this be avoided ?
Illustrate .
“ Rejoice , young man [ or woman ] , while you are young , and let your heart be glad in the days of your youth . ”
Yes , Jehovah wants you as a young person to have a joyful heart .
This article has highlighted one way to make that possible .
Keep yourself focused on theocratic goals , including Jehovah in all your plans .
The earlier you start to do this , the sooner you will sense Jehovah’s guidance , protection , and blessing .
Think of all the sound counsel you find in God’s Word , and take to heart the advice : “ Remember , then , your Grand Creator in the days of your youth . ” ​ — Eccl .
12 : 1 .
No one remains young for long .
Young people quickly progress to adulthood .
Sad to say , as adults , many then regret having followed the wrong goals when they were young or , just as frustrating , having had no goals at all .
But youths who today keep focused on theocratic goals will well into adulthood be deeply satisfied with the choices they made .
This is the case with Mirjana , who as a teenager was very talented at sports .
She was asked to take part in the Winter Olympic Games but chose instead to take up the full - time ministry .
Over 30 years later , Mirjana is still in full - time service , together with her husband .
She explains : “ Fame , honor , power , and riches are transitory and lowly goals in life .

Serving God and trying to contribute in some small way to helping people spiritually are truly noble and lasting goals . ”
Summarize the benefits of being focused on spiritual goals early in life .
Young people in the congregation deserve warm commendation for the way they meet these challenges and for being determined to focus their lives on serving Jehovah .
Youths do this by reaching out for spiritual goals and by giving the preaching work high priority .
Moreover , they make up their mind not to be distracted by this world .
Adolescents can be sure that their hard work is not in vain .
They have the loving support of their brothers and sisters , and when they commit themselves to Jehovah , their plans in life will succeed .

The Hebrew wording allows for both renderings . That said , the revised wording is based on the following factors : The revised wording has lexical and grammatical support . The connection between Psalm 144 : 12 - 15 and the preceding verses hangs on the meaning given to the first word in verse 12 , which is the Hebrew term asher .
Asher can be rendered in a number of ways . For example , it can be understood as a relative pronoun , such as “ who ” or “ whom . ”
“ Who ” was the meaning given in the earlier rendering .
As a result , the good things mentioned in verses 12 to 14 were applied to the wicked , who were mentioned in the preceding verses .
However , asher can also indicate result or consequence and can be translated “ that , ” “ so that , ” or “ then . ” “ Then ” is the rendering used in the 2013 revision and in other Bible translations . The revised wording fits in well with the rest of the psalm .
The use of “ then ” in verse 12 means that the blessings that follow in verses 12 to 14 are understood as applying to the righteous ​ — those who ask to be ‘ rescued and saved ’ from the wicked .
This adjustment is also reflected in verse 15 , where the two occurrences of the word “ happy ” are now in parallel in a positive or complementary way .
As a result , in both instances such happiness applies to the same people ​ — those “ whose God is Jehovah ! ”
Keep in mind , too , that the original Hebrew text had no punctuation , such as quotation marks .
Hence , translators must determine the correct sense , taking into account the Hebrew poetic style , the context , and the related Bible passages .
The revised wording harmonizes with other Bible passages that promise divine blessings for God’s faithful people .
As a result of the adjusted rendering of the term asher , the psalm now reflects David’s well - founded hope that after God delivered the nation of Israel from its enemies , He would bless the people with happiness and prosperity .
For example , Deuteronomy 28 : 4 states : “ Blessed will be your children and the fruit of your ground and the offspring of your livestock , your young cattle and sheep . ”
Indeed , during the reign of David’s son Solomon , the nation enjoyed unprecedented peace and prosperity .
What is more , aspects of Solomon’s reign point forward to the rule of the Messiah . ​ — 1 Ki .
4 : 20 , 21 ; Ps . 72 : 1 - 20 .
In conclusion , the adjusted wording in Psalm 144 does not change our understanding of Bible teachings .
It does , however , make the whole psalm reflect more clearly the long - cherished hope of Jehovah’s servants ​ — the divine execution of the wicked followed by the establishment of lasting peace and prosperity for the righteous . ​ — Ps . 37 : 10 , 11 .
3 Life Story ​ — A Poor Start — ​ A Rich Ending
9 Peace ​ — How Can You Find It ?
12 Jehovah Loves Those Who “ Bear Fruit With Endurance ”
17 Why We “ Keep Bearing Much Fruit ”
The first of these two articles considers Jesus ’ parables of the vine and of the sower and explains what they teach us about our preaching work .
The second article examines several Scriptural reasons that motivate us to carry out the preaching work with endurance .
22 Know Your Enemy
27 Young Ones ​ — Stand Firm Against the Devil
Satan is our enemy .
What is the extent of his influence ?
What are the limits of his power ?
And how can all of us , including young Christians , resist him ?
These two articles will answer those questions and will help us strengthen our resolve to stand firm against the Devil .
32 An Abundant Harvest !
LIFE STORY
As told by Samuel F .
Herd
I was born in a one - room log cabin in a very small town called Liberty , Indiana , U.S.A .
My parents already had three children when I came along ​ — my older brother and two sisters .
Later , my mother gave birth to my two younger brothers and my younger sister .
The log cabin where I was born
DURING my school years , not much changed .
In my school , the people you were with in first grade were the same ones you finished school with ; in fact , you knew the names of most people in town , and they knew yours .

I was one of seven children , and I learned a lot about farming as a youth
The town of Liberty was surrounded by small farms , and the basic crop was corn .
When I was born , my father was working for one of the local farmers .
As a teenager , I learned to drive a tractor and became familiar with other basic farming skills .
I never knew a young father .
My father was 56 years old when I was born ; my mother was 35 .
Nevertheless , my father was a lean , healthy , strong man who loved hard work and taught all of us kids to value it as well .
He never made much money , but he kept a roof over our heads , clothes on our backs , and food in our stomachs ​ — and he was always there for us .
He was 93 years old when he died .
My mother died at the age of 86 .
Neither of them served Jehovah .
Of my siblings , I have one brother who has served faithfully as an elder since that arrangement began back in the early 1970 ’ s .
My mother was very religious .
She took us to the Baptist church every Sunday .
When I was 12 , I first heard about the Trinity .
Curious , I asked my mom : “ How can Jesus be both the Son and the Father at the same time ? ”
I remember her answer : “ Son , it’s a mystery . We’re not meant to understand it . ”
It certainly was a mystery to me .
Still , when I was about 14 , I got baptized in a local creek ​ — dipped three times for the Trinity !
1952 — At age 17 , before I was drafted into the army
While I was in high school , I had a friend who was a prizefighter , and he convinced me to try boxing .
So I started training , and I enrolled in the Golden Gloves , a boxing organization .
I wasn’t very good , so after a few bouts , I gave it up .
Later , I was drafted into the U.S .
Army and sent to Germany .
While I was serving there , my superiors sent me to a Noncommissioned Officers Academy , thinking that I had natural leadership abilities .


They wanted me to make the military my career .
I had no desire to stay in the military service , so after finishing my service time of two years , I was honorably discharged in 1956 .
Before too long , though , I enrolled in a very different army .
1954 - 1956 — I spent two years in the U.S . Army
Up to this point in my life , I had learned to be somewhat macho .
The idea of what a man should be like , as presented in the movies and the social environment , influenced me a great deal .
To my way of thinking , preachers were not manly enough .
But I began to learn some things that turned my life around .
One day , while I was driving my red convertible through town , two young women waved me over .
I knew them ​ — they were the younger sisters of the man who had married my older sister .
Anyway , these two girls were Jehovah’s Witnesses .
I had accepted the Watchtower and Awake !
magazines from them before , but I generally felt that The Watchtower was a bit too deep for my taste .
This time , however , they invited me to come to a Congregation Book Study , a small meeting for Bible study and discussion that was held in their home .
I told them I would think about it .
“ Do you promise ? ”
the smiling girls asked me . “ I promise , ” I said .
I had some regrets about making that promise , but I felt that I could not back out .
So that night I went .
The children impressed me the most . I couldn’t believe how much they knew about the Bible !
After all those Sundays of churchgoing with my mother , I still had very little Bible knowledge .
Now I was determined to learn more . I agreed to a Bible study .
I learned early on that the personal name of God Almighty is Jehovah .
Years before , when I asked my mother about Jehovah’s Witnesses , she simply said , “ Oh , they worship some old man named Jehovah . ”
But I now felt that my eyes were being opened !
I made rapid progress , for I knew that I had found the truth .
Within nine months of that first meeting , I got baptized ​ — in March of 1957 .
My outlook on life changed .
When I think about my old macho attitude , I am glad that I learned what the Bible teaches about real manliness .
Jesus was a perfect man .
He had strength and physical power that would make any ‘ macho man ’ pale in comparison .

Yet , he did not get involved in fights , but “ he let himself be afflicted , ” just as was foretold .
I learned that a true follower of Jesus “ needs to be gentle toward all . ” ​ — 2 Tim . 2 : 24 .
I started pioneering the next year , in 1958 .
Soon , though , I had to stop for a short time .
Why ?
I had decided to take a bride ​ — Gloria , one of those two young ladies who had invited me to the book study !
I have never regretted that decision .

Gloria was a jewel then , and she is a jewel today .

To me , she is like the Hope Diamond ​ — but I don’t have to hope in this case .
I married her ! Let her tell you a bit about herself :
“ I was one of 17 children .
My mom was a faithful Witness .
She died when I was 14 .
That was when my dad began studying .
With Mom gone , Dad made an arrangement with the school principal .
My older sister was then a senior in high school , and Dad asked if she and I could go to school on alternate days .

We would take turns so that one of us could be at home to take care of the younger children and have dinner ready for the family by the time Dad came home from work .

The school principal approved , and that arrangement lasted until my sister graduated .
Two Witness families studied with us , and 11 of us children grew up to be Jehovah’s Witnesses .
I enjoyed field service , even though I have always struggled with shyness .
Sam has helped me with that over the years . ”
Gloria and I got married in February of 1959 .

We enjoyed pioneering together .
In July of that year , we applied for Bethel service , for we longed to serve at world headquarters .
A dear brother , Simon Kraker , interviewed us .
He told us that Bethel was not accepting married couples at that time .
We never lost that desire to serve at Bethel ​ — but it proved to be a long time in coming !
We wrote to world headquarters , asking to be sent to serve where the need was greater .
In response , we were given just one choice : Pine Bluff , Arkansas .
In those days , there were two congregations in Pine Bluff ​ — one white and one “ colored , ” or black .

We were sent to the “ colored ” congregation , which had only about 14 publishers .
You may be wondering why segregation would be practiced in congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses .
And the answer , put simply , is that there was little choice back in those days .
There were laws in place to make it illegal for the races to mix , and there was also the very real threat of violence .
In many places , the brothers had good reason to fear that if the two races met together for worship , their Kingdom Hall would be destroyed .
Such things did happen .
If black Witnesses preached from door to door in a white neighborhood , they would be arrested ​ — and likely beaten up .
So in order to get the preaching work done , we obeyed the laws , hoping that things would change for the better .
Our ministry had its challenges .
While we were working a black territory , we sometimes inadvertently knocked at a door of a white family .
We had to determine quickly if we should try to give a short Scriptural presentation or just acknowledge our mistake and move on .
In some places , that was how things were in those days .
Of course , we had to work hard secularly to support our pioneering .
Most of our jobs paid three dollars a day .
Gloria had a few housekeeping jobs .
I was permitted to help her at one place so that she could get done in half the time .
We were given lunch ​ — a frozen prepackaged meal called a TV dinner that Gloria and I shared before leaving .
Each week , Gloria did ironing for one family .
I did yard work , washed windows , and cared for other odd jobs .
In the home of one white family , we washed the windows ​ — Gloria did it from the inside , and I did it from the outside .

It took all day , so we were given lunch .
Gloria ate inside the house but separate from the family , while I ate outside in the garage .
I didn’t mind . It was a very good meal .
The family was nice ; they were just locked into that system , that way of thinking .

I remember one time when we stopped at a gas station .
After filling up the tank of our car , I asked the attendant if Gloria could use the restroom .
He just glared at me and said , “ It’s locked . ”
On the other hand , we had wonderful times with the brothers , and we loved our ministry !
When we first arrived in Pine Bluff , we moved in with the brother who was the congregation servant at the time .
His wife was then an unbeliever , and Gloria started a Bible study with her .
Meanwhile , I started a study with the couple’s daughter and her husband .
Mother and daughter both decided to serve Jehovah and got baptized .
We had dear friends in the white congregation .
They would have us over for dinner , but they had to do so under the cover of darkness .
The Ku Klux Klan ( KKK ) , an organization that promotes racism and violence , was very active then .
I remember seeing a man sitting on his front porch one Halloween night proudly wearing a white sheet and hood , as those in the KKK did .
That kind of thing , though , did not stop the brothers from showing kindness .
One summer , we needed funds in order to travel to the convention , and a brother agreed to buy our 1950 Ford in order to make it possible .
One day , a month later , we were tired after walking from door to door in the summer heat and conducting Bible studies .
Then we came home to a surprise .
There was our car , parked in front of the house !

A note on the windshield read : “ You can have your car back as a gift from me .
Your brother . ”
Another act of kindness made a lasting impression on me .
In 1962 , I was invited to attend the Kingdom Ministry School at South Lansing , New York .
It was a full month of training for those with oversight of the congregations , circuits , and districts .
When I got the invitation , though , I was unemployed and struggling financially .

However , a telephone company in Pine Bluff had interviewed me for a job .
If they hired me , I would be the first black man to work for that company .
They finally told me that they were going to hire me .
What would I do ?
I had no money to travel to New York .
I seriously thought about taking the job and turning down the invitation to the school .

In fact , I was getting ready to write a letter declining the invitation when something happened that I will never forget .
A sister in our congregation , whose husband was an unbeliever , knocked on our door early one morning and handed me an envelope .
It was full of money .

She and several of her young children had been getting up very early in the morning to go out in the fields and chop cotton ​ — removing the weeds growing between the rows — ​ in order to earn enough money so that I could take the trip to New York .
She said , “ Go to school and learn as much as you can , and come back and teach us ! ”
Later , I asked the telephone company if I could start working there five weeks later than planned .
The answer was an emphatic , “ No ! ”
But it didn’t matter . I had made my decision .
I am so glad that I did not take that job !
Here is how Gloria remembers our time in Pine Bluff : “ I fell in love with the territory !
I had 15 to 20 Bible studies .
So we would go in the house - to - house work in the morning and then conduct Bible studies the rest of the day , sometimes until 11 o’clock at night .
Service was so much fun !
I would happily have stayed in that work .
I have to admit that I did not really want to change my assignment and enter the circuit work , but Jehovah had something else in mind . ”
He certainly did .
While we were pioneering in Pine Bluff , we applied to become special pioneers .
We had high hopes because our district overseer wanted us to help a congregation down in Texas , and he wanted us to go there as specials .
The thought of such a change appealed to us .
So we waited and waited , hoping for an answer from the Society , but we kept finding the mailbox empty .
Finally , a letter came one day ​ — we were assigned to the traveling work !
That was January 1965 .
Brother Leon Weaver , now the coordinator of the United States Branch Committee , was appointed to serve as a circuit overseer at the same time .
I was nervous about becoming a circuit overseer .
A year or so earlier , the district overseer , James A .
Thompson , Jr . , examined my qualifications . He kindly showed me a few areas in which I could improve , mentioning skills that a good circuit overseer needs .
I had been in the circuit work for only a short time when I realized that his counsel was surely needed .
After I was appointed , Brother Thompson was the first district overseer I served with .
I learned a lot from that faithful spiritual brother .
I cherish the help I received from faithful spiritual brothers
In those days , a circuit overseer received little training .
I spent a week observing a circuit overseer as he visited one congregation .
Then he spent the following week observing me as I visited another congregation .
He offered suggestions and guidance . But after that we were on our own .
I remember saying to Gloria , “ Does he really have to leave now ? ”
In time , though , I realized something important . There will always be good brothers who can help you ​ — if you let them help you .
I still cherish the help I received from such experienced brothers as J .
R .
Brown , then a traveling overseer , and Fred Rusk of the Bethel family .
Racism ran high in those days .
One time , the KKK held a march in a town we were visiting in Tennessee .
I remember another time when the service group stopped for a break at a fast - food restaurant .
I went to use the men’s restroom , and I noticed that a very rough - looking character , tattooed like a white supremacist , got up and followed me .
But a white brother , far larger than either me or the rough - looking customer , came in after us .
“ Is everything all right , Brother Herd ? ”
he asked me .
The other customer left quickly without using the facilities .
Over the years , I have seen that prejudice is not really about a person’s skin ; it is about sin ​ — the Adamic sin that infects us all .
And I have learned that a brother is a brother regardless of skin color , and he will die for you if need be .
We spent 33 years in the traveling work , the last 21 of those in the district work .
They were rich , rewarding years , full of encouraging experiences .
Another reward was on the way , though .
In August 1997 our long - standing dream was realized .
We were invited to serve at the United States Bethel ​ — some 38 years after the first time we applied .
The following month , we began our Bethel service .
I assumed that the responsible brothers at Bethel only wanted me to help out temporarily , but that is not how things turned out .
Gloria was a jewel when I married her , and she still is
I was first assigned to work in the Service Department .
That was a learning experience .
The brothers there have to deal with many sensitive and complex questions from elder bodies and circuit overseers around the country .
I appreciated how patient and helpful the brothers were in training me .
Nonetheless , I feel that if I were assigned to work there again , I would still be a novice . Gloria and I love Bethel life .
We have always been early risers , and that habit certainly helps at Bethel .
After a year or so , I began serving as a helper to the Service Committee of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses .
Then in 1999 , I was appointed to be a member of the Governing Body .
I have learned many things in this assignment , but the foremost lesson has been how obvious it is that Jesus Christ ​ — not any man — ​ is the head of the Christian congregation .
Since 1999 , I have been privileged to serve on the Governing Body
Looking back on my life , I sometimes feel a bit like the prophet Amos .
Jehovah took note of that humble shepherd who engaged in menial seasonal work as a nipper of sycamore figs ​ — food considered fit only for the poor .
God appointed Amos to be a prophet , certainly a spiritually rich assignment .
Similarly , Jehovah took note of me , the son of a poor farmer in Liberty , Indiana , and poured out rich blessings on me ​ — too many even to mention !
I certainly feel that my life may have had a poor start materially , but the ending is spiritually rich , far richer than I could ever have imagined !

LOVE JOY
PEACE
PATIENCE
KINDNESS
GOODNESS
FAITH
MILDNESS
SELF - CONTROL
BECAUSE we live in a troubled world , we must work hard to gain peace .
Yet , even when we have a measure of peace , we often struggle to keep it .
What does God’s Word say that can help us to find true and lasting peace ?
And how may we help others to do so ?
In order to enjoy real peace , we must feel safe and have a sense of well - being .
We also need to develop strong friendships with others .
Most important , to find lasting peace , we must cultivate a close friendship with God .
How can we do that ?
Anxieties of life rob many of peace

When we obey Jehovah’s righteous commands and principles , we show that we trust in him and that we desire to have a peaceful relationship with him .
In turn , he draws close to us and blesses us with inner peace .
Isaiah 32 : 17 says : “ The result of true righteousness will be peace , and the fruitage of true righteousness will be lasting tranquillity and security . ”
We can find true inner peace by obeying Jehovah from the heart . ​ — Isa . 48 : 18 , 19 .
We are also helped to develop lasting peace by means of a remarkable gift from our heavenly Father ​ — his holy spirit . ​ — Acts 9 : 31 .
The apostle Paul lists peace as the third aspect of “ the fruitage of the spirit . ”
Since true peace is produced by God’s spirit , we must yield to the influence of the holy spirit to develop true peace .
Let us consider two ways in which God’s spirit can help us find peace .
First , we are helped to develop peace by reading God’s inspired Word regularly .
As we meditate on the Bible’s message , God’s spirit helps us to understand Jehovah’s thinking on many matters .
For example , we see how he remains peaceable and why peace is so important to him . When we apply such lessons from God’s Word , we experience greater peace in our lives . ​ — Prov .
3 : 1 , 2 .

Second , we must pray for God’s holy spirit .
Jehovah promises that if we seek his help , “ the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard [ our ] hearts and [ our ] mental powers by means of Christ Jesus . ”
When we prayerfully rely on Jehovah’s spirit , our God fills us with an inner peace that belongs only to those who have a precious friendship with him . ​ — Rom .
15 : 13 .

How have some applied this Scriptural counsel and made needed changes that allowed them to experience lasting peace ​ — with Jehovah , with themselves , and with fellow humans ?
In the Christian congregation today are some who were once “ prone to anger ” but who are now more thoughtful , kind , patient , and peaceable in their dealings with others .
* Notice how this was true of two Kingdom publishers who were helped to overcome anger and to cultivate peace with others .
Applying Bible principles and praying for God’s spirit will help us to find peace
David’s bad attitude affected his speech .
Before dedicating his life to God , he was often critical of others and used harsh language with his family .
In time , David saw the need to change and become peaceable .
How did he find peace ?
He says , “ I began applying Bible principles in my life , and as a result , the respect between me and my family grew . ”

Rachel’s background influenced her attitude .
She admits , “ Even now , I struggle with feelings of anger because I was brought up in an angry household . ”
What has helped her to become more peaceable ?
She answers , “ Prayerful reliance on Jehovah . ”
David and Rachel are just two examples of the peaceful fruitage that results when we apply inspired Scriptural principles and rely on God’s spirit to help us .
Clearly , despite living in a hostile world , we can have inner peace that contributes to harmony within our families and with fellow Christians .
Yet , Jehovah urges us to “ be peaceable with all men . ”

Is that really possible , and what benefits come from our efforts to make peace ?
By means of our field ministry , we invite people to benefit from our peaceful message about the Kingdom of God .
Happily , many have responded .
As a result , they are no longer overwhelmed with feelings of despair or anger over what they see happening around them .
Instead , they now have a real hope for the future and are moved to “ seek peace and pursue it . ” ​ — Ps .
34 : 14 .
Not all , however , respond favorably to our message , at least not initially .
Even so , we are assisted by God’s spirit to present the good news to them in a peaceful and respectful manner .
In this way , we follow Jesus ’ instructions for the ministry recorded at Matthew 10 : 11 - 13 , where he advised : “ When you enter the house , greet the household .
If the house is deserving , let the peace you wish it come upon it ; but if it is not deserving , let the peace from you return upon you . ”

When we follow Jesus ’ advice , we can leave with our peace intact and with the possibility of helping the person in the future .
We also contribute to peace when we approach government officials in a respectful way ​ — including those who may oppose our work .
For example , the government of one African country allowed prejudice to prevent it from granting approval for the building of Kingdom Halls .
In hopes of resolving the matter peacefully , a brother who had previously served as a missionary in that African land was assigned to visit the country’s High Commissioner in London , England .
He was to tell the official about the peaceful work of Jehovah’s Witnesses in his country .
How did that visit turn out ?
“ When I arrived at the reception desk , ” he relates , “ I concluded by the receptionist’s manner of dress that she belonged to a tribe whose language I had learned .
So I greeted her in her own tongue .
Taken by surprise , she asked me , ‘ What is the reason for your visit ? ’
I politely told her that I wished to see the High Commissioner .
She telephoned the official , who came out to meet me and greeted me in the local language .
After that , he carefully listened to me as I explained to him the peaceful activities of the Witnesses . ”
The brother’s respectful explanation removed much of the commissioner’s misunderstanding and prejudice toward our work .
Some time later , the government of that African country lifted its building restrictions .

How the brothers rejoiced at that peaceful outcome !
Indeed , treating others with respect yields many fine benefits ​ — including peace .
Today , Jehovah’s people enjoy a spiritual paradise that is filled with peace .
You will add to that peace as you work to develop this aspect of the spirit’s fruitage in your life .

Most important , you will gain Jehovah’s approval and find abundant and everlasting peace in God’s new world . ​ — 2 Pet .
3 : 13 , 14 . The quality of kindness will be considered in a future article in this series on the fruitage of God’s holy spirit .
“ As for that on the fine soil , these are the ones who . . . bear fruit with endurance . ” ​ — LUKE 8 : 15 .
SONGS : 68 , 72
Why may we feel discouraged when preaching in less responsive territories ?
Why can all of us have a fruitful ministry ?
What will help us to keep bearing fruit with endurance ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) Why are we encouraged by those who faithfully preach in unresponsive territories ?
( See opening picture . ) ( b ) What did Jesus say about preaching in his “ home territory ” ?
( See footnote . )
SERGIO AND OLINDA are a pioneer couple in their 80 ’ s who live in the United States .

Lately , their sore legs make moving about more difficult .

Still , as they have done for decades , in the morning they walk to a square in a busy section of town , arriving there at seven o’clock .
They take their place near a bus stop and offer our Bible literature to passersby .
Most people ignore them , but the couple remain in their spot , smiling at those who look at them .
At noon , they slowly walk home .
The next morning , at seven o’clock , they are back in the square .
In fact , this faithful couple are busy preaching the Kingdom message there six mornings a week , year - round .
Like Sergio and Olinda , many faithful brothers and sisters around the world have been preaching for decades in unresponsive home territories .
If that challenge describes your situation , we warmly commend you for your endurance .
* Your steadfastness in serving Jehovah is a source of encouragement for many ​ — even for experienced fellow believers .

Note these expressions made by circuit overseers : “ When I work with such faithful brothers and sisters in the ministry , I feel energized by their example . ”
“ Their faithfulness encourages me to persevere and to be courageous in my own ministry . ”
“ Their example warms my heart . ”

What three questions will we consider , and why ?

To strengthen our resolve to complete the preaching work that Jesus assigned us , let us consider the answers to three questions : Why may we at times feel discouraged ?
How can we bear fruit ?
What will help us to keep bearing fruit with endurance ?
( a ) How did the negative reaction from most Jews affect Paul ?
( b ) Why did Paul experience such feelings ?
If you have ever felt discouraged when preaching in less responsive territories , you will relate to the apostle Paul .
During his approximately 30 - year - long ministry , he helped numerous individuals to become disciples of Christ .
Still , he did not succeed in moving many Jews to become true worshippers .
On the contrary , most rebuffed Paul , and some even persecuted him .
How did that adverse reaction from the Jews affect Paul ?
He freely admitted : “ I am telling the truth in Christ . . . I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart . ”
Why did Paul experience such feelings ?
His heart was in the preaching work .
He preached to the Jews out of deep concern for them .
So it pained Paul to see them reject God’s mercy .
( a ) What moves us to preach to our neighbors ?
( b ) Why is it no wonder that we at times feel discouraged ?
Like Paul , we preach to people out of heartfelt concern .
Why ? We know from our own experience how many blessings await those who decide to serve Jehovah .
When we think about the individuals in our territory , we tell ourselves , ‘ If only we could help them to see what they are missing out on ! ’
Therefore , we keep encouraging them to learn the truth about Jehovah and his purpose for mankind .
In effect , we say to those to whom we preach : ‘ We brought a beautiful gift for you .
Please accept it . ’
So when people refuse to accept that gift , it is no wonder that we may have “ pain in [ our ] heart . ”
Such feelings indicate , not that we lack faith , but that our heart is in the preaching work .
So despite moments of discouragement , we endure .
Elena , a pioneer for over 25 years , speaks for many of us when she says : “ I find the preaching work difficult .
Still , there is no other work I would rather do . ”

What question will we consider , and how will we do so ?
Why can we be sure that regardless of where we preach , we can have a fruitful ministry ?
To answer that important question , let us examine two of Jesus ’ illustrations in which he considers the need to “ bear fruit . ”
The first one is about a vine .
( a ) Who are represented by “ the cultivator , ” “ the vine , ” and “ the branches ” ?
( b ) We want to find the answer to what question ?
Read John 15 : 1 - 5 , 8 .
Note that Jesus told his apostles : “ My Father is glorified in this , that you keep bearing much fruit and prove yourselves my disciples . ”
Jesus described Jehovah as “ the cultivator , ” himself as “ the true vine , ” and his disciples as “ the branches . ”
* What , then , is the fruitage that Christ’s followers need to bear ?
In this illustration , Jesus did not directly say what that fruitage is , but he did mention a significant detail that helps us to determine the answer .
( a ) In this illustration , why can the fruitage not refer to new disciples ?
( b ) What is a mark of Jehovah’s requirements ?
Speaking about his Father , Jesus stated : “ He takes away every branch in me not bearing fruit . ”
In other words , Jehovah views us as his servants only if we bear fruit .
Hence , in this illustration , the fruitage that each Christian must bear cannot refer to new disciples whom we may be privileged to make .
Otherwise , faithful Witnesses who do not succeed in making disciples because of preaching in an unresponsive territory would be like the barren branches in Jesus ’ illustration .
However , such a conclusion is unthinkable !
Why ? Because we cannot force people to become disciples .
It would go against Jehovah’s loving ways to disqualify his servants for failing to do something that is beyond their reach .
Whatever Jehovah asks of us is always reachable . ​ — Deut .
30 : 11 - 14 .
( a ) We bear fruit by sharing in what activity ?
( b ) What illustration will we consider , and why ?
What , then , is the fruit we must bear ?
Clearly , the fruit must refer to an activity that each of us is able to carry out .
What activity makes up the essence of “ bearing fruit ” ?
The preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom .
* Jesus ’ illustration of a sower confirms this conclusion .
Let us consider this second illustration .
( a ) In this illustration , what is represented by the seed and the soil ?
( b ) What is produced by a wheat stalk ?
Read Luke 8 : 5 - 8 , 11 - 15 .
In the illustration of the sower , the seed is “ the word of God , ” or the Kingdom message .
The soil represents man’s figurative heart .
The seed that fell on the fine soil took root , sprouted , and grew into , let us say , a wheat stalk .
Then , it “ produced 100 times more fruit . ”
But what kind of fruit is produced by a wheat stalk ?
Does it bear little wheat stalks ?
No , it produces new seed , which may eventually grow into stalks .
In this illustration , one grain of seed yielded a hundred grains .
How does that aspect of the illustration apply to our ministry ?
How do we “ bear fruit with endurance ” ?
( See paragraph 11 )
( a ) How does the illustration of the sower apply to our ministry ?
( b ) How do we produce new Kingdom seed ?
For the sake of comparison , let us say that years ago some Witnesses or our Christian parents shared the Kingdom news with us .
To their joy , they noticed that our heart was receptive to the seedlike Kingdom message .
Just as the fine soil in Jesus ’ illustration retained the seed , we accepted the message and held on to it .
As a result , the seedlike Kingdom message took root and grew , as it were , into a wheat stalk that , in time , was ready to bear fruit .
And just as a wheat stalk produces as fruit , not new stalks , but new seed , we are producing as fruit , not new disciples , but new Kingdom seed .
* How do we produce new Kingdom seed ?
Each time we in one way or another proclaim the Kingdom message , we duplicate and scatter , so to speak , the seed that was planted in our heart .
Hence , this illustration teaches us that as long as we keep on proclaiming the Kingdom message , we “ bear fruit with endurance . ”
( a ) What lesson can we draw from Jesus ’ illustrations of the vine and of the sower ?
( b ) How does that lesson affect you ?
What lesson can we draw from Jesus ’ illustrations of the vine and of the sower ?
They help us to understand that our ability to bear fruit does not depend on the response of the people in our territory .
Instead , it depends on our own faithfulness .
Paul mentioned that same truth when he said : “ Each person will receive his own reward according to his own work . ”
The reward is according to the work , not according to the results of that work .
Says Matilda , a pioneer for 20 years : “ It gives me joy to know that Jehovah rewards our efforts . ”
13 , 14 .
According to Romans 10 : 1 , 2 , for what reasons did Paul not give up on those who reacted negatively to the Kingdom message ?
What will help us to keep bearing fruit with endurance ?
As considered , Paul felt discouraged by the Jews ’ negative reaction to the Kingdom message .
Even so , he did not give up on them .
Note what he further said in his letter to the Christians in Rome about his feelings toward those Jews : “ The goodwill of my heart and my supplication to God for them are indeed for their salvation .
For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God , but not according to accurate knowledge . ”
What reasons for continuing his ministry did Paul highlight ?
First , Paul stated why he kept on preaching to the Jews .
He was moved by “ the goodwill of [ his ] heart . ”
It was his heart’s desire that some Jews would find salvation .
Second , Paul mentioned his “ supplication to God for them . ”
He implored God in prayer to help individual Jews to accept the Kingdom message .
Third , Paul added : “ They have a zeal for God . ” He saw a potential for good in people .
Zeal , if properly directed , can transform sincere individuals into zealous disciples of Christ , as Paul well knew .
How can we imitate Paul ?
Give examples .
How can we imitate Paul ?
First , we strive to maintain a heartfelt desire to find any who might be “ rightly disposed for everlasting life . ”
Second , we supplicate Jehovah in prayer to open the heart of sincere ones .

Silvana , a pioneer for nearly 30 years , says , “ Before I go to a house in my territory , I pray to Jehovah , asking him to give me a positive attitude . ”
We also pray to God that angels may direct us to find honesthearted ones .
Notes Robert , a pioneer for over 30 years , “ To work along with angels who know what is going on in the householders ’ lives is exciting . ”
Third , we try to see a potential for good in people .
Says Carl , an elder who was baptized over 50 years ago , “ I look for any small sign that may reveal a person’s sincerity , perhaps a smile , a kind look , or an honest question . ”

Yes , like Paul , we can endure in bearing fruit .
16 , 17 . ( a ) What lesson can we learn from the instruction found at Ecclesiastes 11 : 6 ?
( b ) Illustrate how our sowing may affect those who observe us .
Even if it appears that the Kingdom message we preach is not reaching the hearts of people , we should not underestimate the impact of our sowing work .
( Read Ecclesiastes 11 : 6 . )
Granted , many people do not listen to us , but they do observe us .
They notice our neat attire , polite behavior , and warm smile .
In time , our conduct may help some to see that their negative views about us may not be correct after all .
Sergio and Olinda , mentioned before , noticed such a change .
Sergio relates : “ Because of illness , we did not go to the square for a while .
When we returned , passersby asked , ‘ What happened ?
We missed you . ’ ”
Adds Olinda with a smile : “ The bus drivers waved to us and some shouted from their driver’s seat , ‘ Good job ! ’
They even asked for our magazines . ”
And to the couple’s surprise , a man stopped by their witnessing cart , gave them a bouquet of flowers , and thanked them for the work they do .
Why are you determined to “ bear fruit with endurance ” ?
Indeed , as long as we “ do not let [ our ] hand rest ” from sowing Kingdom seed , we have a valuable share in giving “ a witness to all the nations . ”
Above all , we have the deep joy that comes from knowing that we have Jehovah’s approval , for he loves all those who “ bear fruit with endurance ” !
Even Jesus recognized that preaching in his “ home territory ” was a challenge ​ — a fact recorded by all four Gospel writers . ​ — Matt .
13 : 57 ; Mark 6 : 4 ; Luke 4 : 24 ; John 4 : 44 .
Although the branches in this illustration refer to those who are in line to receive heavenly life , the illustration contains lessons that benefit all of God’s servants .
While “ bearing fruit ” also applies to producing “ the fruitage of the spirit , ” in this article and the next , we focus on producing “ the fruit of our lips , ” or Kingdom preaching . ​ — Gal .
5 : 22 , 23 ; Heb . 13 : 15 . On other occasions , Jesus used the examples of sowing and reaping to illustrate the disciple - making work . ​ — Matt .
9 : 37 ; John 4 : 35 - 38 .
“ My Father is glorified in this , that you keep bearing much fruit and prove yourselves my disciples . ” ​ — JOHN 15 : 8 .
SONGS : 53 , 60
What Scriptural reasons do we have to keep on preaching ?
Why is it important to keep clearly in mind why we preach ?
How are we helped to endure in our preaching work ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) Shortly before his death , what information did Jesus share with his disciples ?
( See opening picture . ) ( b ) Why is it important for us to keep in mind why we preach ?
( c ) What will we consider ?
ON THE last evening before his death , Jesus had a long talk with his apostles during which he assured them of his deep love for them .
Also , he related to them an illustration about a vine , as we considered in the preceding article .
By means of that illustration , Jesus encouraged his disciples to “ keep bearing much fruit ” ​ — to endure in preaching the Kingdom message . ​ — John 15 : 8 .
However , Jesus told his disciples not only what they needed to do but also why they should do so .
He gave them reasons for carrying out the preaching work .
Why is it important for us to consider those reasons ?
When we keep in mind why we need to continue to preach , we are motivated to endure in giving “ a witness to all the nations . ”
So , then , let us consider four Scriptural reasons for preaching .
In addition , we will examine four gifts from Jehovah that help us to endure in bearing fruit .
( a ) What reason for preaching is found at John 15 : 8 ?
( b ) What do the grapes in Jesus ’ illustration represent , and why is it a fitting comparison ?
The foremost reason why we share in the preaching work is to glorify Jehovah and sanctify his name before mankind .
( Read John 15 : 1 , 8 . )
Note that Jesus compared his Father , Jehovah , to a cultivator , or gardener , who grows grapes . Jesus likened himself to a vine , or stem , and his followers to branches .
Thus , the grapes fittingly illustrate the Kingdom fruitage that is produced by Christ’s followers . Jesus told his apostles : “ My Father is glorified in this , that you keep bearing much fruit . ”
Just as vines that produce good grapes bring honor to a cultivator , so we bring honor , or glory , to Jehovah when we proclaim the Kingdom message to the best of our abilities . ​ — Matt .
25 : 20 - 23 .
( a ) In what ways do we sanctify God’s name ?
( b ) How do you feel about having the privilege to sanctify God’s name ?
In what way does our preaching work sanctify God’s name ?
We cannot make God’s name more sacred .
It is already sacred , or holy , in the absolute sense .
But note what the prophet Isaiah stated : “ Jehovah of armies ​ — he is the One you should regard as holy . ”
We sanctify God’s name , among other ways , by regarding it as separate from all other names and by helping others to regard it as holy .
For instance , by proclaiming the truth about Jehovah’s wonderful qualities and his unchangeable purpose for mankind , we defend God’s name against Satan’s lies and slander .
Also , when we strive to help people in our territory to see that Jehovah is worthy “ to receive the glory and the honor and the power , ” we sanctify God’s name .
Says Rune , a pioneer for 16 years : “ Knowing that I have been given the opportunity to be a witness for the Creator of the universe makes me grateful .
It gives me the desire to keep on preaching . ”
( a ) What reason for preaching is mentioned at John 15 : 9 , 10 ?
( b ) How did Jesus emphasize the need for endurance ?
Read John 15 : 9 , 10 .
Our heartfelt love for Jehovah and for Jesus is an important reason why we preach the Kingdom message .
Jesus told his disciples not only to be in his love but to “ remain in [ his ] love . ”
Why ?
Because living as a true disciple of Christ year after year calls for endurance .
Jesus stressed the need for endurance by using forms of the word “ remain ” over and over in the brief passage recorded at John 15 : 4 - 10 .
How do we show that we want to remain in Christ’s love ?
How do we show that we want to remain in Christ’s love and keep his approval ?
By observing Jesus ’ commandments . Simply put , Jesus tells us , ‘ Be obedient to me . ’
Yet , Jesus only asked us to do what he himself did , for he added : “ Just as I have observed the commandments of the Father and remain in his love . ” Jesus sets the example . ​ — John 13 : 15 .
How are obedience and love connected ?

As to the connection between obedience and love , Jesus earlier said to his apostles : “ Whoever has my commandments and observes them is the one who loves me . ”
Moreover , by carrying out Jesus ’ command to go and preach , we too show our love for God because Jesus ’ commandments reflect his Father’s thinking .
In response to our expression of love , Jehovah and Jesus keep us in their love .
8 , 9 . ( a ) What further reason for preaching do we have ?
( b ) Why do Jehovah’s words found at Ezekiel 3 : 18 , 19 and 18 : 23 motivate us to keep on preaching ?
We have a further reason to continue our preaching work . We preach to give a warning .
In the Bible , Noah is described as “ a preacher . ”
( Read 2 Peter 2 : 5 . )
His preaching work prior to the Flood evidently included a warning of coming destruction .
Why can we draw that conclusion ?
Note what Jesus stated : “ For as they were in those days before the Flood , eating and drinking , men marrying and women being given in marriage , until the day that Noah entered into the ark , and they took no note until the Flood came and swept them all away , so the presence of the Son of man will be . ”
Despite the people’s indifference , Noah faithfully proclaimed the warning message that he had been given .
Today , we preach the Kingdom message to give people an opportunity to learn about God’s will for mankind .
Like Jehovah , we dearly wish that people would respond to the message and “ keep living . ”
At the same time , when we preach from house to house and in public areas , we warn as many people as possible that God’s Kingdom will come and bring an end to this ungodly world . ​ — Ezek . 3 : 18 , 19 ; Dan . 2 : 44 ; Rev . 14 : 6 , 7 .
( a ) What reason for preaching is mentioned at Matthew 22 : 39 ?
( b ) Relate how Paul and Silas helped a jailer in Philippi .
Here is another important reason for continuing with our preaching work : We preach because we love our neighbor .
We are moved by such love to endure in this work , recognizing that people may have a change of heart when their circumstances change .
Consider what the apostle Paul and his companion , Silas , experienced .
In the city of Philippi , opposers threw them into prison .
Then , in the middle of the night , suddenly an earthquake shook the prison and opened its doors .
The jailer feared that the prisoners had fled and was about to kill himself .
But Paul called out : “ Do not hurt yourself ! ”
The distressed jailer asked : “ What must I do to get saved ? ”
They told him : “ Believe in the Lord Jesus , and you will get saved . ” ​ — Acts 16 : 25 - 34 .
Love for Jehovah , Jesus , and our neighbor moves us to preach ( See paragraphs 5 , 10 )
11 , 12 . ( a ) How does the account about the jailer relate to our ministry ?
( b ) We want to be available to do what ?
How does the account of the jailer relate to our preaching work ?
Note this : The jailer had a change of heart and asked for help only after the earthquake struck .
Similarly , some individuals today who have not responded to the Bible’s message before may have a change of heart and look for help when their world is suddenly shaken by a seismic event .
For instance , some in our territory may have lost their longtime job unexpectedly and are left in shock .
Others may be devastated by the recent breakup of their marriage .
Still others may be at a loss after being diagnosed with a serious illness , or they may be heartbroken after losing a loved one in death .
When such events take place , some distressed individuals may ask questions about the meaning of life that at one time they ignored .
Perhaps they even wonder , ‘ What must I do to get saved ? ’
When we meet them , they may want to listen to our message of hope for the first time in their life .
Therefore , by faithfully continuing in our preaching work , we make sure that we will be available to give comfort to people at a time when they may be ready to accept it .

Says Charlotte , who has been in the full - time service for 38 years : “ People today are lost .
They need a chance to hear the good news . ”
Notes Ejvor , a pioneer for 34 years : “ Today , more than ever , many people feel emotionally low .
I really want to help them .
That motivates me to preach . ”
Neighborly love ​ — what a worthy reason , indeed , to continue in our ministry !
13 , 14 . ( a ) What gift is mentioned at John 15 : 11 ?
( b ) How will Jesus ’ joy become ours ?
( c ) How does joy affect our ministry ?
During that last evening before his death , Jesus also mentioned to his apostles several gifts that would help them to endure in bearing fruit .
What are these gifts , and how do we benefit from them ?
The gift of joy .
Will obeying Jesus ’ command to preach become burdensome ?
On the contrary .
After relating his illustration of the vine , Jesus said that as Kingdom preachers , we will experience joy .
( Read John 15 : 11 . )
In fact , he assured us that his joy will become ours .
How ?

As mentioned earlier , Jesus compared himself to a vine and his disciples to branches .
A vine supports the branches .
As long as the branches are attached to it , they receive water and nourishment that flows from the vine .
Similarly , as long as we remain in union with Christ by closely following in his steps , we experience the same joy that he has in doing his Father’s will .
Notes Hanne , a pioneer for over 40 years , “ The joy I always feel after I have been in the ministry stimulates me to continue in Jehovah’s service . ”
Indeed , deep - seated joy gives us the strength to keep on preaching even in challenging territories . ​ — Matt .
5 : 10 - 12 .
( a ) What gift is mentioned at John 14 : 27 ?
( b ) Why does peace help us to keep bearing fruit ?
The gift of peace .
( Read John 14 : 27 . )
Earlier on that last evening before his death , Jesus told his apostles : “ I give you my peace . ”
How does that gift ​ — his peace — ​ help us to bear fruit ?
As we endure , we experience in our heart a lasting feeling of peace that results from knowing that we have Jehovah’s and Jesus ’ approval .
Says Ulf , who has been in the full - time service for 45 years , “ The preaching work makes me tired , but it brings true satisfaction and real meaning to my life . ”
How thankful we are to be blessed with lasting inner peace !
( a ) What gift is mentioned at John 15 : 15 ?
( b ) How could the apostles remain Jesus ’ friends ?
The gift of friendship .
After Jesus stated his desire that the joy experienced by the apostles might “ be made full , ” he explained to them the importance of showing self - sacrificing love .
Next , he said : “ I have called you friends . ”
What a precious gift to receive ​ — friendship with Jesus !
What did the apostles have to do to remain his friends ?
They had to “ go and keep bearing fruit . ”
( Read John 15 : 14 - 16 . )
Some two years earlier , Jesus had instructed his apostles : “ As you go , preach , saying : ‘ The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near . ’ ”
So on that last evening , he encouraged them to endure in the work they had started .
Carrying out Jesus ’ command was challenging , but they could succeed ​ — and thus remain his friends .
How ?
With the help of yet another gift .

17 , 18 . ( a ) What gift is mentioned at John 15 : 16 ?
( b ) How would that gift help Jesus ’ disciples ?
( c ) What gifts strengthen us today ?
The gift of answered prayers .
Jesus stated : “ No matter what you ask the Father in my name , he [ will ] give it to you . ”
How strengthening this promise must have been for the apostles !
* Though they did not clearly grasp it , their Leader’s life on earth would soon end , but they would not be left without support .
Jehovah was ready to answer their prayers for any help they needed to carry out the command to preach the Kingdom message .
And indeed , shortly thereafter , they experienced how Jehovah answered their prayers for help . ​ — Acts 4 : 29 , 31 .
We can be sure that Jehovah answers our prayers for help ( See paragraph 18 )
The same is true today .
As we endure in bearing fruit , we enjoy Jesus ’ friendship .
Furthermore , we can be sure that Jehovah is ready to answer our prayers for help in overcoming obstacles that we may encounter as we preach the Kingdom good news .
How grateful we are to be blessed with answered prayers and friendship with Jesus !
These gifts from Jehovah strengthen us to keep on bearing fruit . ​ — Jas .
1 : 17 .
( a ) Why do we keep sharing in the preaching work ?
( b ) What helps us to finish God’s work ?
As considered in this article , we keep sharing in the preaching work to glorify Jehovah and sanctify his name , to show our love for Jehovah and for Jesus , to give ample warning , and to show love for neighbor .
In addition , the gifts of joy , peace , friendship , and answered prayers strengthen us to finish God’s work .
How pleased Jehovah will be as he observes our whole - souled efforts to “ keep bearing much fruit ” !
During his talk with his apostles , Jesus repeatedly assured them that their prayers would be answered . ​ — John 14 : 13 ; 15 : 7 , 16 ; 16 : 23 .
© 2018 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
Two pioneers offer a tract to a passerby in the capital , Freetown , during the country’s long rainy season
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2017 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
“ We are not ignorant of [ Satan’s ] schemes . ” ​ — 2 COR . 2 : 11 , ftn .
SONGS : 150 , 32
What is the extent of Satan’s influence ?
How does Satan try to influence individuals ?
What did you learn about our enemy ?
In Eden , what did Jehovah reveal about our enemy ?
ADAM no doubt knew that serpents cannot talk .
So he may have surmised that a spirit creature had spoken with Eve through the serpent .
Adam and Eve knew virtually nothing about this spirit .
Even so , Adam made a conscious choice to turn his back on his loving heavenly Father and join this stranger in resisting God’s will .
Immediately , Jehovah began to reveal information about this enemy who had corrupted Adam and Eve , promising that this wicked one would eventually be destroyed .
But Jehovah also warned that for a time , the spirit creature who spoke through the serpent would have the power to oppose those who love God . ​ — Gen . 3 : 15 .
2 , 3 .
Why , apparently , was little said about Satan before the Messiah arrived ?
In his wisdom , Jehovah has never told us the personal name of the angelic son who rebelled against him .
* And God chose not to reveal even the descriptive name of that enemy until some 2,500 years after the initial rebellion .
In fact , only three books of the Hebrew Scriptures , 1 Chronicles , Job , and Zechariah , mention Satan , which means “ Resister . ”
Why was little said about our enemy prior to the arrival of the Messiah ?
Apparently , Jehovah did not want to give Satan undue prominence by devoting large portions of the Hebrew Scriptures to discussing him and his activity .
Jehovah’s primary purpose for inspiring that section of the Scriptures was to identify the Messiah and lead God’s people to him .
When that was accomplished and the Messiah arrived , Jehovah used him and his disciples to reveal much of what we know about Satan and the angels who joined him .
* That is fitting , since it is Jesus and his anointed corulers whom Jehovah will use to crush Satan and his followers . ​ — Rom .
16 : 20 ; Rev . 17 : 14 ; 20 : 10 .
Why should we not be overly anxious about the Devil ?
The apostle Peter describes Satan the Devil as “ a roaring lion , ” and John calls him a “ serpent ” and a “ dragon . ”
But there is no need to be overly anxious about the Devil ​ — his power is limited .
( Read James 4 : 7 . )
We are backed by Jehovah , Jesus , and the faithful angels .
With their help , we can resist our enemy .
Still , we need to know the answers to three key questions : What is the extent of Satan’s influence ?
How does he try to exert that influence on individuals ?
And what are the limits of his power ?
As we discuss these questions , we will also consider the lessons we can learn .
5 , 6 .
Why can human governments not bring about the changes mankind needs most ?
A significant number of angels joined Satan’s rebellion .
Prior to the Flood , Satan lured at least some of them into having immoral relations with the daughters of men .
The Bible reveals this truth by symbolically portraying the dragon as dragging a third of the stars of heaven with him in his fall .
When those angels abandoned God’s family , they put themselves on Satan’s side as opposers of God’s will .
These rebels , however , are not just a mob of troublemakers .
Satan has set up an imitation of God’s Kingdom , with himself as king .
In the invisible realm , Satan has organized the demons into governments , given them authority , and made them world rulers . ​ — Eph .
6 : 12 .

By means of his spirit organization , Satan exerts authority over all human governments .
That fact was made plain when Satan showed Jesus “ all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth ” and said : “ I will give you all this authority and their glory , because it has been handed over to me , and I give it to whomever I wish . ”
Despite Satan’s evil influence , many governments do a measure of good for their citizens .
And individual rulers may have noble intentions .

But no human government or individual ruler is capable of bringing about the changes mankind needs most . ​ — Ps . 146 : 3 , 4 ; Rev . 12 : 12 .
How does Satan use not only governments but also false religion and the commercial system ?
( See opening picture . )
Satan and the demons use not only governments but also false religion and the commercial system to mislead “ the entire inhabited earth . ”
Through false religion , Satan promotes lies about Jehovah .
In addition , the Devil seems determined to make as many people as possible forget God’s name .
As a result , sincere individuals who think that they are worshipping God are deceived into worshipping demons .
Satan also promotes lies through the commercial system .
For example , this system often teaches people that the best way to be happy is to pursue money and gather many possessions .
Those who believe this lie spend their lives serving “ Riches ” rather than God .
Eventually , their love of material things can choke any love they had for God . ​ — Matt . 13 : 22 ; 1 John 2 : 15 , 16 .
8 , 9 . ( a ) What two lessons may we learn from the accounts about Adam , Eve , and the rebellious angels ?
( b ) What advantage do we gain from knowing the extent of Satan’s influence ?
The examples of Adam , Eve , and the rebellious angels teach us at least two important lessons .
First , there are only two sides , and we must choose one .
Either we remain loyal to Jehovah or we place ourselves in Satan’s camp .
Second , those who join Satan receive only limited benefits .
Adam and Eve got the opportunity to set their own standards of good and bad , and the demons attained a measure of influence over human governments .
However , the costs always outweigh any seeming benefits that Satan may offer . ​ — Job 21 : 7 - 17 ; Gal .
6 : 7 , 8 . What advantage do we gain from knowing the extent of Satan’s influence ?
It helps us keep a balanced view of secular authorities and motivates us in our witnessing work .
We understand that Jehovah wants us to respect governmental authorities .
And he expects us to obey the laws of human governments as long as those laws do not conflict with his standards .
But we realize that we must remain neutral , never favoring one political party or human leader over another .

Because we see what Satan is trying to do to Jehovah’s name and reputation , we feel more compelled to teach others the truth about our God .
We proudly bear and use his name , knowing that loving him is far more rewarding than loving money or things . ​ — Isa . 43 : 10 ; 1 Tim . 6 : 6 - 10 .
10 - 12 . ( a ) How may Satan have used bait to trap his angelic brothers ?
( b ) What lessons do we learn from the fall of many angels ?
Satan uses effective methods to influence individuals .

For example , he uses bait to lure them into doing things his way .


Also , he attempts to bully them into submission .
Consider how effective Satan was in using bait to trap a large number of his angelic brothers .
He must have studied them for a considerable time before luring them into taking sides with him .
When at least some of these angels took the bait and had immoral relations with women , they produced a hybrid race that dominated mankind .
Perhaps Satan tempted the disloyal angels not only with the opportunity for immoral sex but also with the promise of seizing power over mankind .
His purpose may have been to disrupt the arrival of the promised ‘ offspring of the woman . ’
In any case , Jehovah ended all such plots by bringing the Flood ​ — a move that thwarted the efforts of Satan and the rebellious angels at that time .
Satan tries to bait us with immorality , unhealthy pride , and the occult ( See paragraphs 12 , 13 )
What lessons can we learn from this incident ?
Never underestimate the lure of immorality or the danger of egotism .
For aeons , the angels who joined Satan served in the very presence of God .
Yet , even in such a good environment , many allowed bad desires to take root and grow . Similarly , we may have served for decades in the earthly part of God’s organization .
Yet , even in this spiritually clean environment , unclean desires can take root .
How important it is that we constantly search our heart , reject immoral thoughts , and suppress unhealthy pride ! ​ — Gal . 5 : 26 ; read Colossians 3 : 5 .
What is another effective bait that Satan uses , and how can we avoid it ?
Another effective bait that Satan uses is curiosity about the occult .

Today , he promotes interest in the demons not only through false religion but also through the entertainment industry .
Movies , electronic games , and other media make spiritism seem exciting .
How can we avoid being caught in this trap ?
We should not expect God’s organization to supply a list of acceptable and unacceptable entertainment .
Each of us needs to train his own conscience to be in harmony with God’s standards .
However , we will make wise choices if we apply the apostle Paul’s inspired counsel to let our love for God “ be without hypocrisy . ”
We could ask ourselves : ‘ Will my choice of entertainment make me seem hypocritical ?
If my Bible students or return visits saw the entertainment I choose , would they think that I practice what I preach ? ’
The more our speech and actions harmonize , the less likely we are to be caught in Satan’s snares . ​ — 1 John 3 : 18 .
Satan tries to bully us with governmental bans , pressure from classmates , and opposition from family ( See paragraph 14 )

How might Satan try to bully us , and how can we cope ?
In addition to offering bait , Satan tries to bully us into compromising our loyalty to Jehovah .
For example , he can maneuver governments into banning our preaching work .
Or he can prompt our associates at work or in school to mock us because of our desire to live by the Bible’s moral standards .
He might also influence well - meaning family members to discourage us from attending meetings .
How can we cope ?
First , we must expect this kind of direct assault ​ — Satan is at war with us .
Then , we need to see the bigger issue behind such incidents ​ — Satan claims that we serve Jehovah only when it is convenient .
He says that if we are pressured , we will turn our back on God .
Finally , we have to rely on Jehovah for strength to face the issue .

Remember , he will never abandon us . ​ — Heb .
13 : 5 .
Can Satan force us to act against our own will ?
Explain .
Satan cannot force people to act against their own will .
Out of ignorance , many work in harmony with Satan’s purpose . But after they learn the truth , each one makes a choice as to whom he or she will serve .
If we are resolved to do God’s will , there is nothing Satan can do to break our integrity . ​ — Job 2 : 3 ; 27 : 5 .
16 , 17 . ( a ) What other limitations do Satan and the demons have ?
( b ) Why should we not fear to pray out loud to Jehovah ?
Satan and the demons have other limitations .
For example , nowhere do the Scriptures indicate that they can read the mind or heart of an individual .
Only Jehovah and Jesus are spoken of as having that ability .
What , though , about speaking or praying out loud ?
Should we fear that the Devil or the demons might hear our prayers and interfere ?
The answer is no .
Why not ?


We are not afraid to do good works in Jehovah’s service just because the Devil might see us .
Likewise , we should not be afraid to pray out loud just because the Devil might hear us .
In fact , the Bible contains many examples of God’s servants who prayed out loud , and there is no hint that these ones feared that the Devil would hear them .
If we do our best to speak and act in harmony with God’s will , we can be confident that Jehovah will not allow the Devil to do us any lasting harm . ​ — Read Psalm 34 : 7 .
We need to know our enemy , but we do not need to be terrified by him .
With Jehovah’s backing , even imperfect humans can conquer Satan .
If we oppose him , he will flee from us .
Young ones seem to be a special target for Satan .
What , specifically , can they do to stand firm against the Devil ?

The next article considers that question .
The Bible reveals that at least some angels have personal names .
Since Jehovah has named each of the stars , it is reasonable to assume that all of his angelic sons , including the one who became Satan , also have personal names .
Satan is mentioned by that name only 18 times in the Hebrew Scriptures but more than 30 times in the Christian Greek Scriptures .
“ Put on the complete suit of armor from God so that you may be able to stand firm against the crafty acts of the Devil . ” ​ — EPH .
6 : 11 .
SONGS : 79 , 140
What are the pieces of the spiritual armor ?
Why is it vital that we wear each piece ?
What do you think of the example that our young ones set ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) Why are young Christians winning the fight against wicked spirit forces ?
( See opening picture . ) ( b ) What will we examine ?
THE apostle Paul likened our life as Christians to that of soldiers engaged in hand - to - hand combat .
Of course , the war we fight is spiritual , not literal . Even so , our enemies are real .
Satan and the demons are skilled warriors with vast experience .
At first glance , our prospects may seem bleak . Young Christians in particular may appear to be vulnerable .
How can they hope to win against superhuman , wicked spirit forces ?
The fact is , young ones can win , and they are winning !
Why ? Because they “ go on acquiring power in the Lord . ”
But they do more than draw on God’s power .
They are dressed for battle .
Like well - trained soldiers , they have “ put on the complete suit of armor from God . ” ​ — Read Ephesians 6 : 10 - 12 .
When developing his illustration , Paul perhaps had in mind the armor worn by Roman legionnaires .
Let us examine why that illustration is appropriate .
As we do , take note of what some young ones have to say about the challenges and the benefits of wearing each piece of spiritual armor .
Is Your Suit of Armor Complete ?
3 , 4 .
How is the truth found in the Bible like a Roman military belt ?
Read Ephesians 6 : 14 .
A Roman military belt had metal plates that protected a soldier’s waist .
It was designed to help relieve the weight of his upper - body armor .
Some belts also had strong clips that served to carry a sword and a dagger .
With his belt fastened tightly , a soldier could confidently stand firm in battle .
Similarly , the truths we learn from God’s Word protect us from the spiritual harm that false teachings cause .
And the more we love divine truths , the easier it is to carry our “ breastplate , ” that is , to live by God’s righteous standards .
In addition , when we have a clear understanding of the truths from God’s Word , we can confidently stand our ground and defend them against opposers . ​ — 1 Pet . 3 : 15 .
Why should we speak the truth ?
When Bible truth is wrapped around us tightly , as it were , we will be moved to live in harmony with it and to speak the truth at all times .
Why will we avoid telling lies ?
Because lies have been one of Satan’s most effective weapons .
Lies damage both the one telling them and the one believing them .
So to the best of our imperfect ability , we avoid telling lies .
But it can be a challenge .
Eighteen - year - old Abigail says : “ Speaking the truth may not always seem worth it , especially when telling a lie can get you out of a difficult situation . ”
Why , then , does she always try to tell the truth ?
“ When I’m truthful , ” she says , “ I have a clean conscience before Jehovah . And my parents and my friends know that they can trust me . ”
Victoria , 23 , says : “ When you tell the truth and stand up for your beliefs , you might get bullied .
But you always get outstanding benefits : You gain confidence , you feel closer to Jehovah , and you earn the respect of those who love you . ”
Certainly , it is worth keeping “ the belt of truth fastened around your waist ” at all times .
The belt of truth ( See paragraphs 3 - 5 )
6 , 7 .
Why is righteousness likened to a breastplate ?
One type of breastplate worn by a Roman soldier in the first century consisted of overlapping horizontal strips of iron .
These strips were bent to fit his torso and were fastened to straps of leather by means of metal hooks and buckles .
The rest of the soldier’s upper body was covered in more strips of iron fastened to leather .
This type of garment restricted a soldier’s movement to some degree , and it required that he regularly check that the plates were firmly fixed in place .
But his armor hindered the edge of a sword or the point of an arrow from piercing his heart or other vital organs .

What an appropriate symbol of how Jehovah’s righteous standards can protect our figurative heart !
Just as a soldier would not swap a breastplate of iron for one made of an inferior metal , we would never want to exchange Jehovah’s standards of what is right for our own .

Our judgment is just too flawed to offer us the protection that we need .
Instead , we regularly check that the ‘ iron plates ’ Jehovah has given us are firmly fixed over our heart .
Why is it worth sticking to Jehovah’s standards ?
Do you sometimes feel that Jehovah’s righteous standards weigh you down or restrict your freedom ?
Daniel , aged 21 , says : “ Teachers and fellow students made fun of me because I live by Bible standards .
For a while , I lost my confidence and felt depressed . ”
How did he recover ?
“ Eventually , ” he says , “ I saw the benefits of living by Jehovah’s standards .
Some of my ‘ friends ’ began taking drugs ; others dropped out of school .
It was sad to see how their lives turned out .
Jehovah really protects us . ”
Madison , 15 , says : “ It’s a struggle for me to stick to Jehovah’s standards and not go along with what my peers think is cool or fun . ”
How does she cope ?
“ I remind myself that I bear Jehovah’s name and that temptation is just Satan’s way of shooting at me .
When I win a struggle , I feel better about myself . ”
The breastplate of righteousness ( See paragraphs 6 - 8 )
9 - 11 . ( a ) What symbolic footwear do Christians put on ?
( b ) What can help us be more comfortable when declaring the good news ?
Read Ephesians 6 : 15 .
A Roman soldier who was not wearing his boots was not ready to march into battle .
His sandallike boots were made of three layers of leather fastened together that gave him an excellent foothold .
The design made the footwear both durable and comfortable .
While the literal boots worn by Roman soldiers carried them into war , the symbolic footwear worn by Christians helps them deliver a message of peace .
Even so , it takes courage to speak up when the opportunity arises .

“ I was afraid to witness to my classmates , ” says 20 - year - old Bo .
“ I think I was embarrassed .
Looking back , I don’t know why I should have been .
Now I’m happy to witness to my peers . ”
Many young ones have found that if they are well - prepared to declare the good news , they feel more comfortable doing it .
What can you do to be ready ?
“ I keep literature in my schoolbag , ” says Julia , 16 , “ and I listen to the opinions and beliefs expressed by my classmates .
Then I’m able to think of what will help them .
When I am prepared , I can talk to them about what will specifically benefit them . ”
Makenzie , 23 , says : “ If you are kind and are a good listener , you’ll get an idea of what your peers are dealing with .
I make sure that I’ve read all the material published for young people . That way I can direct my peers to something in the Bible or on jw.org that will help them . ”
As those comments indicate , the more prepared you are to preach , the more securely your “ boots ” will be bound to your feet .
Feet shod in readiness ( See paragraphs 9 - 11 )
12 , 13 .
What are some of Satan’s “ burning arrows ” ?
Read Ephesians 6 : 16 .
“ The large shield ” carried by a Roman legionnaire was rectangular and covered him from his shoulders to his knees .
It served to protect him from the blows of weapons and the hails of arrows .
Some of the “ burning arrows ” that Satan might fire at you are lies about Jehovah ​ — that He does not care about you and that you are unlovable .
Nineteen - year - old Ida struggles with feelings of unworthiness .
She says , “ I have often felt that Jehovah isn’t close to me and that he doesn’t want to be my Friend . ”
How does she deal with this attack ?
“ The meetings are a giant boost to my faith , ” says Ida .
“ I used to sit there and never comment , thinking that nobody would want to hear what I had to say .

Now , though , I prepare for the meetings and try to answer two or three times .
It’s difficult , but I feel much better when I do .
And the brothers and sisters are so encouraging .
I always come away from the meetings knowing that Jehovah loves me . ”
What truth does Ida’s experience highlight ?


Ida’s experience highlights an important truth : The literal shield given to a soldier had fixed dimensions , but the size of our shield of faith can either shrink or grow .
It is up to us .
How important it is that we build up our faith !
The large shield of faith ( See paragraphs 12 - 14 )
15 , 16 .
How is hope like a helmet ?
Read Ephesians 6 : 17 .
The helmet worn by the Roman infantry was designed to ward off blows directed at the head , neck , and face .
Some helmets had a handle so that a soldier could carry it in his hand .
Just as a helmet protects a soldier’s brain , our “ hope of salvation ” protects our mind , our thinking ability .

Hope keeps us focused on God’s promises and helps us see problems in the right perspective .
But if we want our “ helmet ” to be effective , we must wear it on our head , not carry it in our hand .
17 , 18 . ( a ) How could Satan induce us to remove our helmet ?
( b ) How can we show that we have not been fooled by Satan’s deception ?
How could Satan induce us to remove our helmet ?
Consider the way he dealt with Jesus .
Satan surely knew that Jesus had the hope of eventually ruling mankind .
But Jesus would have to wait until Jehovah’s appointed time .
And before then , he would have to suffer and die .
So Satan offered Jesus the chance to fulfill his hope sooner .
Satan suggested that if Jesus would do one act of worship , he could have it all and have it right then .
Similarly , Satan knows that Jehovah offers us material benefits in the new system .
But we have to wait , and we might have to suffer hardships in the meantime .
So Satan offers us tempting opportunities to enjoy such a life now .
He wants us to seek material benefits first ​ — to have it all and have it now . Satan urges us to seek the Kingdom second . ​ — Matt .
6 : 31 - 33 .
Like many young Christians , 20 - year - old Kiana has not been fooled by this deception .
“ I know that the only hope for solving all our problems is God’s Kingdom , ” she says .
How does this solid hope affect her thinking and actions now ?
“ The hope of Paradise helps me put secular goals in perspective , ” she adds .
“ I don’t try to cash in on my talents or attempt to climb the corporate ladder .
Instead , I’m investing time and energy in spiritual goals . ”
The helmet of salvation ( See paragraphs 15 - 18 )
19 , 20 .
How can we improve our skills in using God’s Word ?
The sword used by Roman infantrymen at the time Paul wrote his letter was about 20 inches ( 50 cm ) long and was designed for hand - to - hand combat .
One reason that Roman soldiers were so effective is that they practiced with their weapons every day .
Paul likens God’s Word to a sword that Jehovah has given us .
But we must learn to use it skillfully when defending our beliefs ​ — or when adjusting our own thinking .
How can you improve your skills ?
Sebastian , aged 21 , says : “ I’ve been writing down one verse from every chapter in my Bible reading .
I’m compiling a list of my favorite verses .
That way , I feel more in tune with Jehovah’s thinking . ”
Daniel , quoted earlier , says : “ As I do my Bible reading , I pick verses that I think will help people I meet in the ministry .
I’ve found that people respond well when they see that you are passionate about the Bible and are doing your best to help them . ”
The sword of the spirit ( See paragraphs 19 - 20 )
Why is there no need to feel intimidated by Satan and the demons ?
As the young ones quoted in this article have shown , there is no need to feel intimidated by Satan and the demons .
They are formidable but not unbeatable .
And they are mortal .
Soon , during the Thousand Year Reign of Christ , they will be confined to a state of complete inactivity , after which they will be destroyed .

We know our enemy , his tactics , and his intentions .
With Jehovah’s help , we can stand firm against him !
District convention in Nyzhnya Apsha , Ukraine , 2012
JESUS foretold that his followers would enjoy an abundant harvest in this time of the end .
Consider how his words have proved true in a unique way in an area of Transcarpathia , Ukraine .
Among just three neighboring towns in that area , there are 50 congregations and over 5,400 publishers .
* Indeed , 1 out of 4 people of the combined population of these three towns is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses !
What is the preaching territory like ?
“ People here respect the Bible , value justice , have strong family ties , and sincerely try to help one another , ” says a local brother named Vasile . He adds : “ They do not always agree with our beliefs .
But when you show them something from the Bible , they will listen attentively . ”
Of course , our brothers and sisters face some unusual challenges when preaching in an area that has such a high publisher - to - population ratio .
For example , one congregation has 134 publishers but only 50 private homes in its territory !
How do the publishers adapt to this situation ?
Many brothers and sisters expend themselves in order to preach in areas where the need is greater .
“ The ratio of publishers to homes in our congregation’s territory is 1 to 2 , ” says a 90 - year - old brother named Ionash .
“ I preach in the village , but until recently when my health deteriorated , I also traveled about 100 miles ( 160 km ) to an unassigned territory , where I preached in the Hungarian language . ”
Publishers must make sacrifices to help out in other territories .
“ To catch the train , I got up at 4 : 00 a.m . and I preached until 6 : 00 p.m . when the train departed for home .
I did that two or three times a week , ” says Ionash .
Did he feel that his efforts were worth it ?
“ I found great joy in that form of ministry , ” he says .

“ I had the pleasure of assisting an isolated family to learn the truth . ”
Understandably , not everyone in the congregations of this area is able to travel long distances .
But all , including older publishers , endeavor to cover the local territory thoroughly .
As a result , in 2017 , these three towns had a combined Memorial attendance of almost double the number of publishers ​ — or half the entire population .

Without question , wherever we may serve , there is still “ plenty to do in the work of the Lord . ” ​ — 1 Cor . 15 : 58 .
The names of the towns are Hlybokyy Potik , Serednye Vodyane , and Nyzhnya Apsha .
3 “ My Kingdom Is No Part of This World ”
8 May We All Be One as Jehovah and Jesus Are One
The people in Jesus ’ day were divided by political , social , and ethnic differences .
In these two articles , we will see how Christ taught his followers to become united and to overcome the prejudices that tend to divide .
We will also see how their example can move us to do the same in our divided world .
13 He Could Have Had God’s Favor
16 Let God’s Laws and Principles Train Your Conscience
For our conscience to be an effective guide , it must be trained .
Jehovah has lovingly provided both laws and principles to help us fine - tune our conscience and view things the way he does .
This article discusses how we can apply Bible principles in a practical way .

21 “ Let Your Light Shine ” to Glorify Jehovah
Jesus urged his disciples to let their light shine to glorify God .
This article offers practical suggestions that , when applied , will certainly help us to ‘ let our light shine ’ more fully .
26 Life Story ​ — Comforted Through All My Anxieties
30 The Power of a Greeting
32 Do You Remember ?
“ For this I have come into the world , that I should bear witness to the truth . ” ​ — JOHN 18 : 37 .
SONGS : 15 , 74
How did Jesus show that he had no interest in political movements ?
What balanced position on taxation did Jesus recommend ?
What is the Christian’s position on the use of violence ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) How is the world becoming more divided ?
( b ) What questions will we answer in this study ?
“ FROM an early age , I saw only injustice , ” recalls a sister in southern Europe , who was reflecting on her past .
“ So I rejected the political system in my country , and I supported what many viewed as radical ideas .
In fact , for many years I was the girlfriend of a terrorist . ”
A brother in southern Africa had also previously justified violence .
“ I believed that my tribe was superior to all others , and I joined a political party , ” he says .
“ We were taught to kill our opponents with spears ​ — even those of our own tribe who supported other political parties . ”
A sister living in central Europe admits : “ I was prejudiced , and I hated anyone who was of a different nationality or who had a religion that was different from mine . ”
A growing trend in today’s world is reflected in the attitudes that those three once had .
Violent independence movements flourish , political divisions become more entrenched , and in many countries , foreigners are subjected to growing animosity .
As the Bible foretold , people of all sorts are “ not open to any agreement ” during these last days .
While the world becomes more divided , how can Christians safeguard their unity ?
We can learn much by examining how Jesus handled a situation in the first century when the land was unsettled by political turmoil .
Let us consider three main points : Why did Jesus refuse to get involved in separatist movements ?
How did he demonstrate the need for God’s servants to avoid taking sides on political issues ?
And how did Jesus teach us that violence against others is not justified ?
3 , 4 . ( a ) What political expectations did the Jews have in Jesus ’ day ?
( b ) How did those sentiments affect Jesus ’ disciples ?
Many Jews to whom Jesus preached longed for independence from Rome .
Jewish Zealots , or nationalists , stirred up these feelings among the people .
Many of those extremists followed the ideas of Judas the Galilean .
He was a false messiah in the first century who misled a large number .
Jewish historian Josephus states that this Judas “ incited his countrymen to revolt , upbraiding them as cowards for consenting to pay tribute to the Romans . ”
The Romans had Judas executed .
Some of the Zealots even resorted to violence to further their goals .
Apart from those extremists , ordinary Jews were keenly awaiting the arrival of a political Messiah .
That is , they expected that when the Messiah appeared , he would bring glory to their nation and freedom from the yoke of Rome . Many believed that the Messiah would establish a kingdom on earth in Israel .
When that occurred , millions of Jews scattered abroad would return to their homeland .
Recall that John the Baptist once asked Jesus : “ Are you the Coming One , or are we to expect a different one ? ”
John may have wanted to know whether someone else would fulfill all the hopes of the Jews .
The two disciples who met the resurrected Jesus on the road to Emmaus also had unfulfilled hopes about the Messiah .
( Read Luke 24 : 21 . ) Soon thereafter , Jesus ’ apostles asked him : “ Lord , are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time ? ” ​ — Acts 1 : 6 .
( a ) Why did the people of Galilee want Jesus to be their king ?
( b ) How did Jesus correct their thinking ?
Such expectations about the Messiah doubtless led the people of Galilee to want Jesus to become their king .
We can imagine that they were thinking that Jesus would be an ideal leader .


He was an outstanding speaker ; he could cure the sick ; he could even supply food for the hungry .
After Jesus fed about 5,000 men , he sensed the mood among the people .
“ Jesus , knowing that they were about to come and seize him to make him king , withdrew again to the mountain all alone . ”
The following day on the other side of the Sea of Galilee , the enthusiasm may have died down some .
Jesus then explained to the crowd the true nature of his work .
He had come to bring spiritual , not material , benefits to the nation .
“ Work , not for the food that perishes , but for the food that remains for everlasting life , ” he told them . ​ — John 6 : 25 - 27 .
How did Jesus make clear that he did not seek political power on earth ?
( See opening picture . )
Shortly before his death , Jesus realized that some of his followers were expecting him to set up an earthly kingdom centered in Jerusalem .
He corrected that idea by giving them the illustration of the minas .
It showed that Jesus , the “ man of noble birth ” would have to go away for a long time .
Jesus also stated his neutral position to the Roman authorities .

Pontius Pilate asked Jesus : “ Are you the King of the Jews ? ”
Perhaps the governor feared that Jesus could cause political unrest , a principal concern throughout Pilate’s rule .
Jesus answered : “ My Kingdom is no part of this world . ”
He would not get involved in politics , for his Kingdom was to be a heavenly one .
He told Pilate that his work on earth was to “ bear witness to the truth . ” ​ — Read John 18 : 37 .
Is your focus on the world’s problems or on God’s Kingdom ?
( See paragraph 7 )
Why may it be a challenge to avoid giving tacit support to independence movements ?
When we understand our assignment as clearly as Jesus understood his , we will avoid even lending tacit , or unspoken , support for political independence movements .

This may not be easy .
“ People in our area are becoming more and more radical , ” notes one traveling overseer .
“ A nationalistic spirit has taken over , and many take for granted that political independence will improve their lives .
Thankfully , the brothers have safeguarded their Christian unity by concentrating on preaching the good news of the Kingdom .
They look to God to solve injustice and the other problems we face . ”
Give an example of the burden faced by first - century Jews .
Injustice often inflames political passions .
Taxation was a hot political issue in Jesus ’ time .

In fact , the rebellion of Judas the Galilean , mentioned earlier , was sparked by a registration to ensure that the people paid tribute to Rome .
Subjects of Rome , including those who listened to Jesus , were required to pay many taxes , such as on goods , land , and houses .
And the corruption of the tax collectors increased the sense of being under a heavy burden .
Tax collectors might purchase a position of authority at a public auction and then profit from what was collected .
Zacchaeus , the chief tax collector in Jericho , had become rich by extorting money from the people .
His course was probably typical of that of many .
9 , 10 . ( a ) How did Jesus ’ enemies try to get him involved in a political issue ?
( b ) What do we learn from Jesus ’ response ?
( See opening picture . )
Jesus ’ enemies tried to trap Jesus by getting him to take sides on a taxation issue .
The tax in question was the “ head tax , ” a tax of one denarius levied on Roman subjects .

( Read Matthew 22 : 16 - 18 . )
The Jews especially resented this tax . It represented their subjection to Rome .
The “ party followers of Herod ” who raised this issue hoped that if Jesus denounced the tax , he might be accused of sedition .
If Jesus said that taxation was a necessary burden , he could lose the support of his followers .
Jesus was careful to remain neutral on the taxation issue .
“ Pay back . . .
Caesar’s things to Caesar , but God’s things to God , ” he said .
Of course , Jesus knew that corruption was common among tax collectors .
But Jesus did not want to get sidetracked , diverted from the much more important issue .
That was God’s Kingdom , which would be the real solution .
He thereby set the example for all his followers .
They should avoid becoming involved in political issues , no matter how right or just a certain cause might seem .
Christians seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness .
They do that instead of forming strong opinions about , or speaking out against , certain unjust practices . ​ — Matt .
6 : 33 .
How can we in a positive way channel our desire for justice ?
Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses have succeeded in moving away from strong political views that they once held .
“ After taking social studies classes at the university , I developed radical views , ” says a sister in Great Britain .
“ I wanted to champion the rights of black people , since we had suffered so much injustice .
Although I was good at winning arguments , I still ended up feeling frustrated .

I did not realize that the causes of racial injustice had to be uprooted from people’s hearts .

When I began to study the Bible , however , I realized that I had to start with my own heart .
And it was a white sister who patiently helped me to make the journey .
Now I am serving as a regular pioneer in a sign - language congregation , and I am learning to reach out to all kinds of people . ”
What kind of “ leaven ” did Jesus tell his disciples to avoid ?
In Jesus ’ day , religion was often mixed up in politics .
The book Daily Life in Palestine at the Time of Christ notes that “ the religious sects into which the Jews were divided corresponded more or less to what we term political parties . ”
So Jesus warned his disciples : “ Keep your eyes open ; look out for the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod . ”
That reference to Herod likely refers to the party followers of Herod .
Politically , the Pharisees supported Jewish independence .
Matthew’s account reveals that Jesus also mentioned the Sadducees in this conversation .
They wanted to keep the status quo .
Many of their members enjoyed political power under the Roman administration .
Jesus emphatically warned his disciples to stay clear of the teachings , or leaven , that these three groups advocated .
Interestingly , this conversation took place not long after the occasion when the people wanted to make Jesus king .
13 , 14 . ( a ) How did political and religious issues lead to violence and injustice ?
( b ) Why does injustice not justify violence ?
( See opening picture . )
When religion is mixed with politics , violence can easily erupt .
Jesus taught his disciples that they must maintain neutrality in these circumstances .
That is related to the reason why the chief priests and the Pharisees planned to kill Jesus .
They saw him as a political and religious rival who threatened their position .

“ If we let him go on this way , they will all put faith in him , and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation , ” they said .
Thus , High Priest Caiaphas took the lead in plotting Jesus ’ death . ​ — John 11 : 49 - 53 ; 18 : 14 .
Caiaphas sent soldiers to arrest Jesus under the cover of night .
Jesus was aware of this shameful strategy , so during his final meal with the apostles , he asked them to get some swords .
Two would be sufficient to teach them a vital lesson .
Later that night , Peter used a sword to attack a member of the mob .
No doubt , he was incensed at the injustice of Jesus ’ nighttime arrest .
But Jesus told Peter : “ Return your sword to its place , for all those who take up the sword will perish by the sword . ”
This powerful lesson was in harmony with what Jesus prayed about earlier that night ​ — they must be no part of the world .

( Read John 17 : 16 . )
Fighting injustice was something to be left to God .
15 , 16 . ( a ) How has God’s Word helped Christians to avoid conflict ?
( b ) What contrast does Jehovah see when he observes today’s world ?
The sister in southern Europe mentioned earlier learned this same lesson .
“ I have seen that violence does not bring justice , ” she observes .
“ I saw that those who resort to violence often end up dead .
And many others become embittered .
I was so happy to learn from the Bible that only God can bring true justice to the earth .
For the last 25 years , that is the message I have been preaching . ”
The brother in southern Africa has replaced his spear with “ the sword of the spirit , ” God’s Word , as he preaches a message of peace to his neighbors , whatever their tribe .

And after becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , the sister in central Europe married a brother from an ethnic group she formerly hated .
All three made these changes because they desired to be like Christ .
And how important these changes are !
The Bible likens humanity to a sea that tosses and turns , a sea that knows no peace .
While political issues stir people up , divide them , and provoke senseless violence , we maintain our peace and unity .
And as Jehovah observes our divided world , it must warm his heart to see the unity that exists among his people . ​ — Read Zephaniah 3 : 17 .
( a ) What are three ways in which we can promote unity ?
( b ) What will we consider in the following article ?
We have seen that we can promote Christian unity in three ways : ( 1 ) We put our trust in God’s heavenly Kingdom to correct injustice , ( 2 ) we refuse to take sides in political issues , and ( 3 ) we reject violence .
Sometimes , however , our unity can be threatened by prejudice .
The following article will look at how we can successfully face this challenge , as Christians did in the first century .
“ I make request . . . that they may all be one , just as you , Father , are in union with me . ” ​ — JOHN 17 : 20 , 21 .
SONGS : 24 , 99
What sort of prejudices did Jesus ’ early disciples have to overcome ?
What first - century examples prove that people can overcome disunity ?
What can we do to promote more unity among God’s people today ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) What request did Jesus make in his final prayer with his apostles ?
( b ) Why might Jesus have been concerned about unity ?
JESUS was concerned about unity during his final supper with his apostles .
When praying with them , he spoke of his desire that all his disciples be one , just as he and his Father are one .
( Read John 17 : 20 , 21 . )
Their unity would give a powerful witness , offering clear evidence that Jehovah had sent Jesus to the earth to do God’s will .
Love would be a mark of Jesus ’ true disciples that would contribute to their unity . ​ — John 13 : 34 , 35 .
Jesus ’ emphasis on unity is understandable .
He had noticed a lack of unity or harmony among the apostles , such as during his final meal with them .
As had happened before , a dispute arose over “ which one of them was considered to be the greatest . ”
Another time , James and John requested that Jesus give them prominent places alongside him in his Kingdom . ​ — Mark 10 : 35 - 40 .
What factors may have contributed to a lack of unity among Christ’s disciples , and what questions will we consider ?
Desire for prominence , however , was not the only potential cause of disunity among Christ’s disciples .
The people of the land were divided by animosity and prejudice .
Jesus ’ disciples would need to overcome those feelings .
In this article , we will consider the following questions : How did Jesus deal with prejudice ?
How did he help his followers learn to treat others impartially and be truly united ?
And how will his teaching help us to keep united ?
Give examples of prejudice shown toward Jesus .
Jesus himself was subjected to prejudice .
When Philip told Nathanael that he had found the Messiah , Nathanael replied : “ Can anything good come out of Nazareth ? ”
Apparently , Nathanael knew of the prophecy at Micah 5 : 2 and considered Nazareth too insignificant to be the Messiah’s hometown .
Similarly , prominent Judeans despised Jesus because he was a Galilean .

Many Judeans viewed the people of Galilee as inferior .

Other Jews sought to insult Jesus by calling him a Samaritan .

The Samaritan people were ethnically and religiously distinct from the Jews .
Both Judeans and Galileans had little respect for the Samaritans and avoided them . ​ — John 4 : 9 .
What prejudice did Jesus ’ followers experience ?
Jewish leaders likewise heaped scorn on Jesus ’ followers .
The Pharisees classed them as among the “ accursed people . ”
Yes , they considered anyone who had not studied at the rabbinic schools or who did not keep their traditions to be contemptible and ordinary .
The prejudice that Jesus and his disciples suffered was rooted in religious , social , and ethnic divisions . The disciples too were affected by prejudice .
To be united , they would have to change their mind - set .
Use examples to show how prejudice can affect us .
Today , most of us are surrounded by prejudice .
We could be victims , or we ourselves might hold some prejudices .
“ My hatred for white people grew as I focused on the injustice that was inflicted on the Aboriginal people ​ — past and present , ” explains a sister who is now a pioneer in Australia .
“ This hatred was also fueled by the abuse I had personally experienced . ”
A Canadian brother mentioned the prejudice he once had concerning language .
“ I thought French - speaking people were superior , ” he admits . “ And I developed animosity toward English - speaking people . ”
How did Jesus deal with prejudice ?
Feelings of prejudice in our time can be deeply ingrained , just as they were in Jesus ’ day .
How did Jesus deal with them ?
First , he rejected prejudice , being totally impartial .
He preached to rich and poor , Pharisees and Samaritans , even tax collectors and sinners .
Second , by his teaching and example , Jesus showed his disciples that they must overcome suspicion or intolerance toward others .
What fundamental principle underlies Christian unity ?
Explain .

Jesus taught his followers a fundamental principle that underlies our unity .
“ All of you are brothers , ” he said .
( Read Matthew 23 : 8 , 9 . )
Of course , one sense in which we are “ brothers ” is that all of us have descended from Adam .
But there is more .
Jesus explained that his disciples were brothers and sisters because they recognized Jehovah as their heavenly Father .
In addition , they had become members of one large spiritual family , united by love and faith .
Thus in their letters , the apostles often referred to fellow disciples as ‘ brothers and sisters . ’ ​ — Rom . 1 : 13 ; 1 Pet . 2 : 17 ; 1 John 3 : 13 .
* 9 , 10 . ( a ) Why did the Jews not have reason for racial pride ?
( b ) How did Jesus teach a lesson in overcoming racial prejudice ?
( See opening picture . )
After making it clear that we should view one another as brothers and sisters , Jesus stressed the need for humility .
( Read Matthew 23 : 11 , 12 . )
As noted , undue pride among his apostles led to some disunity . And pride of race could also have been a problem .
Did the Jews have reason to be proud because they were descendants of Abraham ?
Many Jews had that deep - seated conviction .
But John the Baptist told them : “ God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones . ” ​ — Luke 3 : 8 .

Jesus condemned racial pride .

He used an opportunity to do so when a scribe asked : “ Who really is my neighbor ? ”
In answer , Jesus gave an illustration of a Samaritan who kindly cared for a traveler ​ — a Jew — ​ who had been beaten by thieves .
Passing Jews ignored this unfortunate man , whereas the Samaritan took pity on him .
Jesus concluded his story by telling the scribe to be like that Samaritan .
Jesus showed that a Samaritan could teach the Jews the meaning of true neighborly love .
Why did the disciples of Christ need to view foreigners impartially , and how did Jesus help them understand that ?
To fulfill their commission , Jesus ’ disciples needed to conquer the pride and prejudice they had .
Before ascending to heaven , he assigned them to bear witness to “ all Judea and Samaria , and to the most distant part of the earth . ”
Jesus had earlier prepared them for such an extensive assignment by drawing their attention to good qualities in foreigners .
He praised a foreign army officer for his outstanding faith .
In his hometown of Nazareth , Jesus spoke of how Jehovah had favored foreigners , such as the Phoenician widow from Zarephath and the Syrian leper Naaman .
And Jesus not only preached to a Samaritan woman but he spent two days in a Samaritan town because of the people’s interest in his message . ​ — John 4 : 21 - 24 , 40 .
12 , 13 . ( a ) How did the apostles react when Jesus taught a Samaritan woman ?
( See opening picture . ) ( b ) What shows that James and John did not fully get the point ?
It was not easy , however , for the apostles to put aside their prejudice .
They were surprised to see that Jesus was willing to teach a Samaritan woman .
Jewish religious leaders would not talk to a woman in public , let alone a Samaritan woman with a questionable reputation .
The apostles urged Jesus to eat .
But his reply indicated that he was so absorbed in the spiritual discussion that his hunger could be ignored .
Preaching ​ — even to a Samaritan woman — ​ was the will of his Father , and it was like food for him . ​ — John 4 : 31 - 34 .
James and John did not grasp this lesson .
When journeying with Jesus through Samaria , the disciples sought overnight lodging in a Samaritan village .
The Samaritans refused to receive them , so James and John angrily suggested calling down fire from heaven to destroy the entire village .
Jesus firmly rebuked them .
We may wonder if James and John would have reacted the same way if the inhospitable village had been in their home region of Galilee .
It seems likely that prejudice had kindled their animosity .

It could be that the apostle John felt embarrassed about his rash outburst when he later enjoyed a successful preaching campaign among the Samaritans . ​ — Acts 8 : 14 , 25 .
How was an issue that may have involved language resolved ?
Not long after Pentecost 33 C.E . , an issue of discrimination arose .

When distributing food to needy widows , Greek - speaking widows were overlooked .
Prejudice about language may have been a factor .
The apostles quickly rectified matters by appointing qualified men to handle the food distribution .
All these spiritually qualified men had Greek names .
This may have made them more acceptable to the offended widows .
How did Peter make progress in showing impartiality to everyone ?
( See opening picture . )
In 36 C.E . , the disciple - making work became much more international .
The apostle Peter had a custom of associating only with Jews .
But after God made it clear that Christians should not be partial , Peter preached to Cornelius , a Roman soldier .
( Read Acts 10 : 28 , 34 , 35 . )
Thereafter , Peter enjoyed food and association with Gentile believers .
Years later , though , Peter stopped eating with non - Jewish Christians in the city of Antioch .
In that case , Paul gave Peter a fitting reproof , which he evidently accepted .
When Peter wrote his first letter to Jewish and Gentile Christians in Asia Minor , he spoke warmly about the whole association of brothers . ​ — 1 Pet . 1 : 1 ; 2 : 17 .
What reputation did early Christians gain ?
Clearly , the apostles did learn from Jesus ’ example to love “ all sorts of men . ”
Although it took time , they adjusted their way of thinking .
The early Christians gained a reputation of loving one another .
Tertullian , a second - century writer , quoted non - Christians as saying : “ They love one another . . .
They are ready even to die for one another . ”
Putting on “ the new personality , ” the early Christians came to view all people as equal in the sight of God . ​ — Col . 3 : 10 , 11 .
How can we uproot prejudice from our heart ?
Give examples .
Today , we too may need time to uproot prejudice from our heart .
A sister in France describes her battle : “ Jehovah has taught me what love means , what sharing means , what loving people of all kinds means .
But I am still learning to overcome prejudice toward others , and it is not always easy .
That is why I continue praying about it . ”
A sister in Spain faces a similar battle : “ I sometimes struggle with my feelings of animosity toward a certain ethnic group , and I succeed most of the time .
But I know that I need to keep on fighting .
Thanks to Jehovah , I am happy to belong to a united family . ”
Each of us can make a sincere self - analysis .
Might we personally need to fight some feelings of prejudice , as do these two sisters ?
18 , 19 . ( a ) What reasons do we have to welcome everyone ?
( b ) How can we do this in practical ways ?
It is good to remember that at one time we were all “ strangers , ” or foreigners , not close to God .
But Jehovah drew us to him “ with the cords of love . ”
And Christ welcomed us .
He opened the door , as it were , so that we could become part of God’s family .
( Read Romans 15 : 7 . )
Since Jesus has kindly accepted us , as imperfect as we are , it should be unthinkable for us to reject anyone else !
Servants of Jehovah seek the wisdom from above and are united in love ( See paragraph 19 )
Divisions , prejudice , and hostility will doubtless increase in the world as we approach the end of this wicked system .
As servants of Jehovah , though , we seek the wisdom from above , which is impartial and promotes peace .
We rejoice as we forge friendships with people from other lands , accepting cultural differences and possibly even learning the languages of others .
When we do this , peace flows just like a river , and justice like the waves of the sea . ​ — Isa .
48 : 17 , 18 .
What happens when love molds our minds and hearts ?
“ The floodgates of true knowledge were opened to me , ” says the Australian sister mentioned earlier .
She acknowledges how a study of the Bible affected her , saying : “ I was molded with a new heart and mind .
So all the ingrained prejudice and hatred melted away before my eyes . ”
And the Canadian brother says that he now realizes that “ ignorance is often the mother of racism and that people’s qualities do not depend on their place of birth . ”
He married an English - speaking sister !
Such changes in attitude are a testimony to the fact that Christian love can and does conquer prejudice .
It unites us with an unbreakable bond . ​ — Col .

3 : 14 . The term “ brothers ” can include female members of the congregation .
Paul addressed his letter to the “ brothers ” in Rome .
That clearly included sisters , several of whom he mentioned by name .
The Watchtower has long described Christian believers as ‘ brothers and sisters . ’
WE SERVE Jehovah and want his favor , do we not ?
But to whom will God grant his favor and blessing ?
Some in Bible times enjoyed his approval even though they had formerly committed grave sins .
Others who had admirable qualities failed to win God’s approval .
So we might ask , “ What is Jehovah primarily looking for in each of us ? ”

The example of Rehoboam , king of Judah , can help us find the answer .
Rehoboam’s father was Solomon , who reigned in Israel for 40 years .
Solomon died in 997 B.C.E .
Then Rehoboam traveled north from Jerusalem to Shechem to be anointed as king .
Do you imagine that he was apprehensive about following in the footsteps of Solomon , who was known for his extraordinary wisdom ?
How could Rehoboam foresee that soon his own ability to resolve complex issues would be tested ?
Rehoboam must have found the atmosphere in Israel thick with tension .
In time , representatives of the people came to him and set their concerns squarely before him : “ Your father made our yoke harsh .
But if you make the harsh service of your father easier and you lighten the heavy yoke he put on us , we will serve you . ” ​ — 2 Chron .
10 : 3 , 4 .
Rehoboam may have felt trapped !
If he met the people’s demands , he , his family , and those of his court might have to cut back on some luxuries and make fewer demands on the people .
On the other hand , if he refused , the people might rebel .
What would he do ?
The new king first consulted with the older men who had been counselors to Solomon .
However , then Rehoboam sought advice from younger men , those of his own age .
Following their advice , Rehoboam decided to treat the people harshly .
He answered : “ I will make your yoke heavier , and I will add to it . My father punished you with whips , but I will do so with scourges . ” ​ — 2 Chron . 10 : 6 - 14 .
Do you see a lesson for us ?
Clearly , there is often wisdom in listening to older , spiritually mature ones .
Having the benefit of experience , they may perceive the likely outcome of a decision and thus give us good advice . ​ — Job 12 : 12 .
In response to the revolt , Rehoboam mustered his army .
But Jehovah intervened through the prophet Shemaiah , saying : “ You must not go up and fight against your Israelite brothers .
Each one of you must return to his house , for I have caused this to happen . ” ​ — 1 Ki . 12 : 21 - 24 .
*

Not even put up a fight ?
You can imagine how that would have troubled Rehoboam !
What would people think of the king who threatened to punish his subjects “ with scourges ” yet soon yielded to this flagrant rebellion ?
( Compare 2 Chronicles 13 : 7 . )
Nevertheless , the king and his armies “ obeyed the word of Jehovah and went back home , as Jehovah had told them . ”
What is the lesson for us ?
It is wise to obey God even if doing so might expose us to some ridicule .
Obedience to God leads to his favor and blessing . ​ — Deut . 28 : 2 .
What was the result for Rehoboam ?
Obediently abandoning his plan to fight the newly established nation , he turned his attention to building cities in the tribal territories of Judah and Benjamin over which he still reigned .
He reinforced a number of cities “ to a very great degree . ”
More important , for a time he adhered to Jehovah’s laws .
As the ten - tribe kingdom of Israel under Jeroboam sank into idolatry , many from there “ supported Rehoboam ” by traveling to Jerusalem to take their stand for true worship .
Thus , Rehoboam’s obedience strengthened his kingship .
When his kingship was firmly established , however , Rehoboam did something unexpected .

He abandoned the law of Jehovah in favor of pagan worship !
But why ?
Was he acting under the influence of his mother , who was an Ammonitess ?
Whatever his reasons , the nation as a whole followed him .
Jehovah therefore allowed King Shishak of Egypt to capture many Judean cities , despite Rehoboam’s having fortified them ! ​ — 1 Ki .
14 : 22 - 24 ; 2 Chron . 12 : 1 - 4 .
Matters came to a head when Shishak reached Jerusalem , where Rehoboam reigned .
At this point , Shemaiah the prophet delivered God’s message to Rehoboam and his princes : “ You have abandoned me , so I have also abandoned you to the hand of Shishak . ”
How did Rehoboam respond to that message of discipline ?
Commendably ! The Bible reports : “ The princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said : ‘ Jehovah is righteous . ’ ”
Hence , Jehovah rescued Rehoboam and Jerusalem from destruction . ​ — 2 Chron .
12 : 5 - 7 , 12 .
Thereafter , Rehoboam continued to reign over the southern kingdom .
Before his death , he generously distributed gifts among his many sons , evidently to discourage any revolt against their brother Abijah , his successor .
In this , Rehoboam showed a measure of insight that he did not display earlier .
His merits notwithstanding , Rehoboam failed to gain God’s favor .
The Bible sums up his reign , saying : “ He did what was bad . ”
Why ?
Because “ he had not resolved in his heart to search for Jehovah . ” ​ — 2 Chron . 12 : 14 .
Unlike King David , Rehoboam failed to cultivate a close bond with Jehovah
Think of the implications : Rehoboam obeyed God sometimes .
And he did some good things in behalf of Jehovah’s nation .
But he failed to cultivate a close bond with Jehovah or a fervent desire to please him .
Thus , he fell into wrongdoing and false worship .
You might wonder : ‘ When Rehoboam did respond to divine correction , was he acting primarily under the influence of others rather than out of heartfelt repentance and a desire to please God ? ’
Later in life he returned to doing what was bad .
How different he was from his grandfather , King David !
Yes , David made mistakes , but his life was characterized by love for Jehovah , devotion to true worship , and genuine repentance over his transgressions . ​ — 1 Ki . 14 : 8 ; Ps . 51 : 1 , 17 ; 63 : 1 .
We certainly can learn a lesson from Rehoboam .
It is commendable when people provide for their families and strive to accomplish something worthwhile .
But to enjoy divine favor , we must first and foremost support true worship and stick to it .
This we will likely do if we strive to maintain a deep love for Jehovah .
Just as we stoke a fire to keep it alive , we need to keep our love for God burning by regularly studying his Word , meditating on what we read , and persevering in prayer .
Our love for Jehovah will , in turn , ignite our desire to please him in all that we do .
It will move us , if at times it is needed , to genuine repentance .
Unlike Rehoboam , we will remain steadfast in true worship . ​ — Jude 20 , 21 .
Because of Solomon’s unfaithfulness , God had already indicated that the kingdom would be split . ​ — 1 Ki . 11 : 31 .
“ HELLO !
How are you today ? ”
No doubt you have often used a greeting such as that .
You may even have accompanied your greeting with a handshake or a hug .
Customs and words used may differ from place to place , but the basics of a greeting are much the same .

In fact , not offering or responding to a greeting may be taken as unloving or as evidence of bad manners .
But not all people are inclined to greet others .
Some hesitate to extend a greeting out of shyness or low self - worth .
Some find it difficult to greet others who are of a different race , culture , or social standing .

However , even a brief greeting can have very positive effects .
Ask yourself : ‘ What can a greeting accomplish ?
And what can God’s Word teach me about greetings ? ’
When the apostle Peter welcomed the first Gentile , Cornelius , into the Christian congregation , he said : “ God is not partial . ”
Later , Peter wrote that God “ desires all to attain to repentance . ” We might initially associate those texts with a person who is learning the truth .
But Peter also exhorted Christians : “ Honor men of all sorts , have love for the whole association of brothers . ”
Would it not , then , be good for us to greet others irrespective of their race , culture , or background ?
That would be part of showing them honor and love .
The apostle Paul urged those in the congregation : “ Welcome one another , just as the Christ also welcomed you . ”
Paul took special note of brothers who had proved to be “ a strengthening aid ” to him .
How much more so do brothers and sisters today need strengthening as we face Satan’s intense attack against God’s people . ​ — Col . 4 : 11 , ftn .
; Rev . 12 : 12 , 17 .
Scriptural examples show that greetings can do more than make others feel welcome .
When it came time for the Son of God to have his life transferred to the womb of Mary , Jehovah sent an angel to speak to her .
“ Greetings , you highly favored one , ” the angel began , “ Jehovah is with you . ”
Mary was “ deeply disturbed , ” uncertain why an angel was speaking to her .
Seeing this , the angel said : “ Do not be afraid , Mary , for you have found favor with God . ”
He explained that it was God’s purpose for her to give birth to the Messiah .
Rather than remain disturbed , Mary obediently replied : “ Look !
Jehovah’s slave girl !
May it happen to me according to your declaration . ” ​ — Luke 1 : 26 - 38 .
It was a privilege for the angel to act as Jehovah’s messenger ; yet , he did not consider it beneath him to address an imperfect human .
He started off with a greeting .
Can we learn from that example ?
We should be ready to greet others and encourage them .
With just a few words , we can help others and give them confidence that they are really a part of Jehovah’s people .
Paul came to know many in congregations throughout Asia Minor and Europe .
His letters contain many specific greetings .
We see this from Romans chapter 16 .
Paul sent greetings to many fellow Christians .
He mentioned Phoebe , “ our sister , ” and urged the brothers to “ welcome her in the Lord in a way worthy of the holy ones and give her whatever help she may need . ”
Paul greeted Prisca and Aquila , “ to whom not only I but also all the congregations of the nations give thanks . ”
He greeted some who are essentially unknown today ​ — “ my beloved Epaenetus ” as well as “ Tryphaena and Tryphosa , women who are working hard in the Lord . ”
Yes , Paul readily greeted his brothers and sisters . ​ — Rom .


16 : 1 - 16 .
Imagine the joy it brought them to know that they were remembered fondly .
How their love for Paul and one another must have deepened !
And hearing those loving greetings surely encouraged other Christians , helping them to remain firm in the faith .
Yes , greetings that express genuine personal interest and commendation fortify friendships and unite loyal servants of God .
When Paul landed at the port of Puteoli and headed up toward Rome , local Christians came south to meet him .
Upon seeing them from a distance , Paul “ thanked God and took courage . ”
At times , we may be able only to smile or wave as a greeting .
Yet , even that can uplift a person , perhaps one who is depressed or sad .
The disciple James needed to give strong counsel .
Some Christians were becoming spiritual adulteresses by having friendship with the world .
But take note of how James began his letter :
“ James , a slave of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ , to the 12 tribes that are scattered about : Greetings ! ”
His readers no doubt found it easier to accept his advice when they saw from his greeting that they had the same standing before God .
Yes , a humble greeting can open the way even for a discussion of serious matters .

A truly effective greeting , however short , should be sincere and reflect genuine love .
That is so even if it seems to go unnoticed .
A sister in Ireland once arrived at the Kingdom Hall just as the meeting was about to start .
As she hurried in , one brother turned , smiled , and said : “ Hello .

It’s really good to see you . ”
The sister simply took her seat .
A few weeks later , she approached the brother and mentioned that for some time she had been coping with a distressing situation at home .
“ I felt so upset that evening , ” she said , “ that I almost did not come to the Kingdom Hall .
I cannot remember much of the meeting , except your greeting .
It made me feel really welcome .
Thank you . ”
That brother had been unaware of the powerful effect of his brief greeting .
“ When she told me what those few words meant to her , ” he observes , “ I was so glad I made the effort .
It made me feel good too . ”
Solomon wrote : “ Cast your bread on the waters , for after many days you will find it again . ”
By being conscious of the value of our greetings , especially to fellow Christians , we enrich others as well as ourselves .
So let us never underestimate the power of a greeting .
© 2018 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
Two sisters share a timely message with a store owner in Montevideo , capital of Uruguay
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2017 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
“ I ponder over your reminders . ” ​ — PS .
119 : 99 .
SONGS : 127 , 88
How can your conscience serve as a moral compass ?
Why is it important that we grow to love God’s laws ?
How is our progress toward maturity related to our conscience ?
What is one thing that makes humans superior to animals ?
ONE thing that makes humans superior to animals is the fact that humans have been endowed with a conscience .
That has been true ever since man has been on the earth . After Adam and Eve broke Jehovah’s law , they hid themselves .
This indicates that their conscience was bothering them .
How can our conscience be like a compass ?
( See opening picture . )
Those with a poorly trained conscience can be likened to a ship that is navigating with a defective compass .
Setting off on a journey without an accurate compass can be treacherous .
The winds and currents of the ocean can easily throw a ship off course .

A properly calibrated compass can help the captain to keep the ship on course .
Our conscience can be likened to a moral compass .
It is an inner sense of right or wrong that can guide us in the right direction .
But in order for our conscience to be an effective guide , it must be properly adjusted , or calibrated .
What can result when a conscience is not properly trained ?
When a person’s conscience is not properly trained , it does not act as a restraint from wrongdoing .
Such a conscience might even convince us that “ bad is good . ”
Jesus warned his followers : “ The hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he has offered a sacred service to God . ”
That was true of those who murdered the disciple Stephen , and it has been true of others like them .
How ironic that in committing such evil crimes as murder , religious fanatics violate the very laws of the One whom they claim to worship !

Clearly , their consciences are treacherous guides !
How can we prevent our conscience from becoming ineffective ?
How can we prevent our conscience from becoming ineffective ?
The laws and principles contained in God’s Word are “ beneficial for teaching , for reproving , for setting things straight , for disciplining in righteousness . ”
Therefore , by diligently studying the Bible , meditating on what it says , and applying it in our lives , we can train our conscience to be more sensitive to God’s thinking , and it can thus serve as a reliable guide .
Let us consider how Jehovah’s laws and principles can help us to train our conscience .
5 , 6 .
How do we benefit from following God’s laws ?
In order to benefit from God’s laws , we need to do more than simply read them or become acquainted with them .
We must grow to love and respect them . God’s Word says : “ Hate what is bad , and love what is good . ”
But how do we actually do that ?
A key is to learn to view things the way Jehovah views them .
To illustrate : Imagine that you are having difficulty sleeping well .
Your doctor prescribes a program involving diet , exercise , and lifestyle changes .
After trying the program , you find that it works !
You probably would greatly appreciate your doctor for helping you to improve the quality of your life .
In like manner , our Creator has given us laws that can protect us from the damaging effects of sin and thus improve our life .

Think about how we benefit from following the Bible’s laws about lying , scheming , stealing , sexual immorality , violence , and spiritism .
( Read Proverbs 6 : 16 - 19 ; Rev .
21 : 8 ) When we experience the rich rewards that come from doing things Jehovah’s way , our heart naturally grows in love and appreciation for both Jehovah and his laws .
Reading and meditating on real - life Bible accounts can help us to do what ?
Thankfully , we do not need to suffer the consequences of breaking God’s laws to learn valuable lessons .
We can learn from the mistakes of others whose transgressions are recorded in God’s Word .
Proverbs 1 : 5 says : “ A wise person listens and takes in more instruction . ”
Indeed , we receive the very best instruction from God , such as when we read and meditate on real - life Bible accounts .
For example , think of the pain that King David experienced after he disobeyed Jehovah’s command and committed adultery with Bath - sheba .
While reading and meditating on this account , we might ask ourselves : ‘ How could King David have avoided the heartache he suffered because of his adulterous act with Bath - sheba ?
If I faced a similar temptation , would I have the strength to turn away ?
Would I flee like Joseph , or would I give in like David ? ’
By reflecting on the bad consequences of sin , we can strengthen our heart to “ hate what is bad . ”
8 , 9 . ( a ) What purpose does our conscience serve ?
( b ) How do Jehovah’s principles and our conscience interact ?
We may well stay far away from practices that God hates .
Yet , there are other activities or aspects of life about which the Scriptures provide no specific command .
In such areas , how can we determine what is acceptable and pleasing to God ?
That is where our Bible - trained conscience comes into play .
Jehovah has lovingly given us principles that work in conjunction with our Bible - trained conscience .
He himself says : “ I , Jehovah , am your God , the One teaching you to benefit yourself , the One guiding you in the way you should walk . ”
By using our mind and heart to reason on Bible principles , we correct , direct , and mold our conscience .
That , in turn , helps us to make wise decisions .
What are principles , and how did Jesus use them effectively ?
A principle is a fundamental truth or doctrine that is used as a basis of reasoning or action .
To understand a principle includes understanding the thinking of the Lawgiver and the reasons why he gave certain laws .
Throughout his ministry , Jesus taught basic truths to help his disciples recognize the consequences of certain attitudes or actions .
For example , he taught that resentment can lead to violence and that lust can lead to adultery .
To help us have a conscience that is properly trained , we should let godly principles guide us and thus bring glory to God . ​ — 1 Cor .
10 : 31 .
A mature Christian is sensitive to the conscience of others ( See paragraphs 11 , 12 )
How may consciences differ ?
On certain matters , two different Christians with Bible - trained consciences might come to opposite conclusions .
Consider the use of alcoholic beverages .
The Bible does not condemn the moderate use of alcohol .
It does , however , warn against the excessive use of alcohol , as well as drunkenness .
Does this mean that a Christian has no other factors to consider as long as his use of alcohol is moderate ?
Not at all .

While he may be at peace with his own conscience , the Christian must also consider the conscience of others .
How can the words found at Romans 14 : 21 move us to respect the conscience of others ?

Regarding the need for a Christian to be sensitive to the conscience of others , Paul wrote : “ It is best not to eat meat or drink wine or do anything over which your brother stumbles . ”
Would you be willing to forgo things that are within your right if you could thus avoid stumbling a brother whose conscience differs from yours ?

No doubt you would .
Before they came to a knowledge of the truth , some of our brothers abused alcohol , but now they are determined to abstain from it .
Surely , none of us would want to contribute to a brother’s falling back into a course that would cause him great harm !
Therefore , it would be unloving for a host to pressure a brother to drink alcohol if he has declined to do so .
How did Timothy set a good example in promoting Kingdom interests ?
While likely in his late teens or early 20 ’ s , the young man Timothy submitted to painful circumcision in order to avoid stumbling Jews to whom he was going to preach .
His attitude was similar to that of the apostle Paul .

Like Timothy , are you willing to make personal sacrifices for the good of others ?


14 , 15 . ( a ) What is involved in growing to maturity ?
( b ) In what way is demonstrating love for others related to Christian maturity ?
All Christians should want to move “ beyond the primary doctrine about the Christ ” and to “ press on to maturity . ”
This does not happen automatically . We need to “ press on , ” or keep working at it .
Growing to maturity involves advancing to an increased level of knowledge and insight .
That is why we have repeatedly been encouraged to read a portion of the Bible daily .
Have you made that a personal goal ?
Doing such reading can give you greater insight into Jehovah’s laws and principles and a deeper understanding of God’s Word .
The foremost law for Christians is the law of love .
Jesus told his disciples : “ By this all will know that you are my disciples ​ — if you have love among yourselves . ”

Jesus ’ half brother James called love “ the royal law . ”
Paul said : “ Love is the law’s fulfillment . ”
This emphasis on love is not surprising , since the Bible tells us that “ God is love . ”
God’s love is not reflected merely in sentiment .
John wrote : “ By this the love of God was revealed in our case , that God sent his only - begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him . ” Yes , God’s love moved him to action .
To the extent that we demonstrate love for Jehovah and his Son , for our Christian brothers , as well as for others of mankind , we give evidence of our Christian maturity . ​ — Matt .
22 : 37 - 39 .
As we reason on godly principles , our conscience becomes a more reliable guide ( See paragraph 16 )
As we progress spiritually toward maturity , why do principles become more important to us ?
As you advance toward Christian maturity , you will find that principles become more important to you .
That is because laws may apply to a specific situation , whereas principles are far broader in application .
For example , a young child does not understand the dangers of bad associations , so a discerning parent will set rules to protect him .
But as the child matures , his thinking ability develops , and he is able to reason on Bible - based principles .
Thus , he can increasingly make wise decisions in choosing his associates .

( Read 1 Corinthians 13 : 11 ; 14 : 20 . )
When we reason on godly principles , our conscience increasingly becomes a more reliable guide , attuned to God’s thinking .
Why can we say that we have what we need to make wise decisions ?
Do we have everything we need to make wise decisions that please Jehovah ? Yes .
By making skilled use of the laws and principles found in God’s Word , we will be “ fully competent , completely equipped for every good work . ”
Therefore , search for Scriptural principles in order to ‘ perceive what the will of Jehovah is . ’
Make good use of study aids provided through the Christian congregation , such as the Watch Tower Publications Index , the Research Guide for Jehovah’s Witnesses , the Watchtower Library , the Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY , and the JW Library app .
These tools are designed to help us get the most out of our personal and family study .
What blessings result when we act in harmony with Jehovah’s laws and principles ?

Blessings result from observing Jehovah’s laws and principles , as we read at Psalm 119 : 97 - 100 : “ How I do love your law !
I ponder over it all day long . Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies , because it is with me forever .
I have more insight than all my teachers , because I ponder over your reminders .
I act with more understanding than older men , because I observe your orders . ”
We can increasingly act with wisdom , insight , and understanding if we take the time to “ ponder over ” God’s laws and principles .
With diligent effort , we can attain “ the measure of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ ” as we let God’s laws and principles train our conscience . ​ — Eph . 4 : 13 .
“ Let your light shine before men , so that they may . . . give glory to your Father . ” ​ — MATT .
5 : 16 .
SONGS : 77 , 59
In addition to engaging in the ministry , in what other ways can we let our light shine ?
How is Christian unity involved in drawing attention to the truth ?
Why is keeping on the watch so important today ?
What special cause for joy do we have ?
HOW thrilling it is to hear of increases that Jehovah’s people are experiencing !
Last year we regularly conducted over 10,000,000 Bible studies .
This certainly indicates that God’s servants are letting their light shine !
And think of the millions of interested ones whom we welcomed at the Memorial .
They could thus learn of the love that God expressed when he provided the ransom . ​ — 1 John 4 : 9 .
2 , 3 . ( a ) What obstacle does not prevent us from “ shining as illuminators ” ?
( b ) In view of Jesus ’ words recorded at Matthew 5 : 14 - 16 , what will we consider ?
Worldwide , Jehovah’s people speak many different languages .
However , this does not prevent us from offering united praise to our Father , Jehovah .
No matter what our mother tongue is or where we live , we can shine “ as illuminators in the world . ” ​ — Phil . 2 : 15 .
The increase we observe , the unity we enjoy , and the watchful attitude that we strive to maintain all contribute to our bringing glory to Jehovah .
In this article , we will discuss how that is accomplished . ​ — Read Matthew 5 : 14 - 16 .
4 , 5 . ( a ) In addition to preaching , how can we let our light shine ?
( b ) What benefits may come from our kind demeanor ?
( See opening picture . )
“ No one could be faithful and true to the Lord in these remaining days . . . unless he would avail himself of the opportunity of letting his light shine . ” That was a comment in the article “ Light in the Darkness , ” published in The Watch Tower of June 1 , 1925 .
The article then explained : “ He must do this by telling the good news to the peoples of the earth , and by conforming himself to the ways of light . ”
Clearly , one way we let our light shine is by preaching the good news and making disciples .
In addition , we can glorify Jehovah by our Christian conduct .
Householders and passersby observe our behavior .

Our friendly smile and warm greeting say much about who we are and what kind of God we worship .
“ When you enter the house , ” Jesus told his disciples , “ greet the household . ”
In the area where Jesus and the apostles often preached , it was not unusual for people to invite strangers into their homes .
Today , this is not the custom in many places .
Still , your positive , friendly manner as you explain why you are there can often allay a householder’s concern or ease his irritation . A pleasant smile is often the best introduction .
That has also proved true when brothers and sisters engage in public witnessing using a literature cart .
As you share in that form of service , you may find that people often react favorably to a pleasant smile and greeting .
It may move them to approach us and take one of our publications .
Your kind demeanor can also help you to start a conversation .
How did one elderly couple expand their ministry ?
An elderly couple in England have health issues that severely limit their house - to - house ministry .

They decided to let their light shine right outside their home .
They display some Bible publications on a table at the time when parents come to pick up their children from a nearby school .
Curiosity has prompted many to obtain copies of Questions Young People Ask ​ — Answers That Work , Volumes 1 and 2 , as well as brochures .
A pioneer sister from their congregation joined them in their witnessing initiative .
Her friendly manner and the couple’s genuine , sincere efforts prompted one of the parents to accept a Bible study .
What help can you offer to newcomers in your area ?
In recent years , many countries have experienced an influx of refugees .
What can you do to help such ones come to know Jehovah and his purpose ?
For a start , why not learn a greeting in the languages commonly spoken by newcomers in your area ?
The JW Language app is a tool that can help you do that .
Additionally , why not learn a few phrases that may capture their interest ? You might then be able to direct them to jw.org and show them the variety of videos and publications available in their language . ​ — Deut .
10 : 19 .
8 , 9 . ( a ) What practical help do we receive at our midweek meetings ?
( b ) How can parents help their children to participate at meetings ?
Jehovah lovingly provides the Life and Ministry Meeting so that we can become more effective in the field ministry .
The practical instruction we receive at this meeting helps many of us feel more confident about making return visits and conducting Bible studies .
Many newcomers have observed that our children participate at meetings .
Parents , help your children to let their light shine by teaching them to comment in their own words .
Their simple , heartfelt expressions have sometimes prompted newly interested ones to recognize the ring of truth . ​ — 1 Cor . 14 : 25 .
What role does family worship play in promoting unity ?

Another way to let your light shine is by promoting unity in your family and in your congregation .
One way parents can do so is by arranging for a regular Family Worship program .
Many include watching JW Broadcasting sometime during the month .
After viewing the program , why not take time to discuss how to apply the points that were featured ?
When presiding over family worship , the parent should remember that the guidance a young child needs may well differ from that of a teenager .
Make suitable application of the study material so that each member of the family benefits . ​ — Ps . 148 : 12 , 13 .
Taking an interest in older ones is very upbuilding ( See paragraph 11 )
11 - 13 .
How can all promote unity in the congregation and help others to let their light shine ?
How can young ones promote unity in the congregation and thus encourage others to let their light shine ?
If you are a Christian youth , why not make it your aim to take an interest in older ones ?
You might respectfully ask them to relate an experience from their years of service .
You will find this very upbuilding , and both you and they will be even more motivated to let the light of truth shine .
And all of us can make it a point to welcome those who attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall .
Your doing so will promote unity and may move visitors to want to share in letting their light shine .
Your efforts can include greeting visitors with a friendly smile , perhaps even helping new ones to their seats .
Try to introduce them to others , thus making newcomers feel at home .
If you are assigned to handle a meeting for field service , you can do much to help older ones to have a share in the ministry .

Do they have suitable territory ?
In some cases , you may choose to assign them to work with a younger companion who can provide physical support .
You can also show understanding to those whose health and circumstances limit what they can do .
Yes , your consideration and discernment can help young and old , experienced and less experienced , to preach the good news with zeal . ​ — Lev .
19 : 32 .


The psalmist was moved to exclaim : “ How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity ! ”
( Read Psalm 133 : 1 , 2 . )
By being together , the Israelites benefited greatly from the good influence of others who worshipped Jehovah .
It was like anointing oil that was both pleasant and refreshing .
Why not be resolved to have a positive influence , promoting unity among your brothers and sisters ? If you are already doing so , that is commendable .
Could you “ widen out , ” that is , do it to a greater extent and more consistently ? ​ — 2 Cor . 6 : 11 - 13 , ftn .
What can you do to let your light shine in the neighborhood ?
What about increasing your efforts to let the light of Bible truth shine in your neighborhood ?
Your kind words and deeds may well attract a neighbor to the truth .
Ask yourself : ‘ How do my neighbors view me ?
Do I keep my home and property tidy , thus reflecting well on the neighborhood ?
Do I take the initiative to be helpful to others ? ’
When you are in conversation with other Witnesses , why not draw them out on how their kindness and good conduct have affected relatives , neighbors , workmates , or schoolmates ?
It is quite likely that you will hear positive experiences . ​ — Eph . 5 : 9 .
Why is keeping on the watch vital ?
Our attitude comes into the picture as we strive to increase the extent to which we let our light shine .
Jesus repeatedly exhorted his disciples : “ Keep on the watch . ”
Obviously , if we believe that the “ great tribulation ” is a long way off , that it will come sometime but not in our lifetime , we will lack a sense of urgency with regard to the preaching work .
Instead of shining brilliantly in our neighborhood , our light will flicker and could even go out .

16 , 17 .
What can you do to maintain a watchful attitude ?
As these critical times worsen , all of us need to keep on the watch .
When Jehovah acts , it will be at the right time . There is no question about that .
Meanwhile , exercise patience , being ever watchful .
Read God’s Word each day , and be vigilant with a view to prayers .
Take note of sterling examples of brothers and sisters whose lives reflect their joy in keeping on the watch as well as letting their light shine .
One fine example is the experience recounted in the article “ Seventy Years of Holding On to the Skirt of a Jew , ” published in The Watchtower of April 15 , 2012 , pages 18 - 21 .
Fill your life with upbuilding activity and association .

That will bring you great joy , and it will seem to you that time is passing quickly .
A century ago , our brothers were busy and accomplished much .
But we are accomplishing much more today under Jehovah’s guiding hand .
We are letting our light shine to an extent that could not have been imagined previously .
Shepherding visits offer us the opportunity to seek wisdom from God’s Word ( See paragraphs 18 , 19 )
18 , 19 .
How can congregation elders help us to be vigilant and active ?
Illustrate .
It is faith - strengthening to know that our imperfection does not stop us from serving Jehovah acceptably .
Consequently , appreciate Jehovah’s provision of “ gifts in men , ” congregation elders .
( Read Ephesians 4 : 8 , 11 , 12 . )
The next time an elder visits you , take advantage of the opportunity to draw on his wisdom and benefit from his advice .
Two elders in England responded to a call from a married couple who were having problems .

The wife felt unevenly yoked spiritually .
Her husband admitted that he was not the best teacher and did not arrange for regular family worship .
The elders directed the couple’s attention to Jesus ’ example .
He took care of his disciples and considered their needs . The elders urged the husband to imitate Jesus .
They encouraged the wife to be patient .
The elders also gave the couple some practical suggestions on how they could work together to have family worship with their two children .
Later the elders commended the husband for his efforts .
They encouraged him to persevere and to rely on holy spirit to help him become a good spiritual head .
Their loving interest and support have helped this family to let their light shine .
What can you expect as you let your light shine ?
“ Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah , who walks in His ways , ” sang the psalmist .
When you let your light shine ​ — by inviting others to serve God , by conducting yourself in a way that promotes unity , and by maintaining a watchful attitude — ​ you will find increased happiness .
Others will see your fine works , and many will be moved to give glory to our Father . ​ — Matt .
5 : 16 .
LIFE STORY
As told by Edward Bazely
On the west bank of the Indus River , in what is now Pakistan , is the ancient city of Sukkur . That is where I entered the world on November 9 , 1929 .
About that time , my parents obtained a set of brightly colored books from an English missionary .
Those Bible - based books had a role in shaping my life as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses .
THOSE books were called the rainbow set .
When I was able to examine them , I found vivid illustrations that fired my imagination .
As a result , from an early age , I developed a hunger for Bible knowledge , such as was presented in those outstanding volumes .
As World War II threatened to engulf India , my world seemed to fall apart .
My parents separated and then divorced .
I could not understand why two people whom I loved would leave each other .
I felt emotionally numb and abandoned .
I was an only child , and I could not seem to get the comfort and support that I wanted so much .
My mother and I were then living in Karachi , the provincial capital .
One day , Fred Hardaker , an elderly doctor who was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , called at our home .
He was of the same faith as the missionary who had provided those books for my family .
He offered my mother a Bible study .
Mother declined but said that I might be interested .
I started studying with Brother Hardaker the very next week .
A few weeks later , I began attending Christian meetings at Brother Hardaker’s medical clinic .
About 12 elderly Witnesses met there for worship .
They comforted me and cared for me like a son .
I fondly remember how they sat with me , coming down to my eye level , and talked with me as genuine friends , which I so needed at the time .
Soon Brother Hardaker invited me to accompany him in the field ministry .
He taught me to operate a portable phonograph so that we could play records containing short Bible talks .
A few of the talks were quite direct , and some householders did not appreciate the message .
But I got a thrill out of witnessing to others .
I was full of zeal for Bible truth and loved sharing it with others .

As the Japanese army advanced on India , the British authorities put increasing pressure on Jehovah’s Witnesses .
Finally , in July 1943 , that pressure affected me personally .
The school principal , an Anglican clergyman , expelled me for being “ an unsatisfactory character . ”
He told my mother that my association with Jehovah’s Witnesses set a bad example for the other students .

She was horrified and barred me from associating with the Witnesses .
Later , she shipped me off to my father at Peshawar , a town some 850 miles ( 1,370 km ) to the north .
Deprived of spiritual food and association , I became spiritually inactive .
In 1947 , I returned to Karachi in search of work .
While there , I visited Dr . Hardaker’s clinic .
He gave me a warm and hearty welcome .
“ Now , what seems to be troubling you ? ”
he asked , thinking that I had come for medical advice .
“ Doctor , I am not physically ill , ” I answered . “ I’m spiritually sick .
I need a Bible study . ”
“ When would you like to start ? ” he asked .
“ Right now if possible , ” I replied .
We spent a wonderful evening studying the Bible .

I felt as if I had come home spiritually .
My mother tried hard to stop me from associating with the Witnesses , but this time I was determined to make the truth my own .
On August 31 , 1947 , I symbolized my dedication to Jehovah by water baptism .
Soon , at the age of 17 , I started to serve as a regular pioneer .
My first pioneer assignment was Quetta , a former British military outpost .
In 1947 , the country was partitioned into India and Pakistan .
* This event triggered widespread religious violence among the people , resulting in one of the largest mass migrations in history .

Some 14 million refugees were displaced .
Muslims in India went to Pakistan , while Hindus and Sikhs in Pakistan relocated to India .
Amid that chaos , I boarded an overcrowded train in Karachi and clung precariously to an outside handrail most of the way to Quetta .
I attended a circuit assembly in India in 1948
In Quetta , I met George Singh , a special pioneer in his mid - 20 ’ s .
George gave me an old bicycle that I could ride ( or push ) around the hilly territory .
Most of the time , I preached by myself .
Within six months , I had 17 Bible studies , and some of the students came into the truth .
One of them , an army officer named Sadiq Masih , helped George and me to translate some Bible literature into Urdu , the national language of Pakistan .

In time , Sadiq became a zealous publisher of the good news .

Heading to Gilead School aboard the Queen Elizabeth
Later , I returned to Karachi and served with Henry Finch and Harry Forrest , newly arrived missionaries from Gilead School .

What valuable theocratic training they gave me !
Once I accompanied Brother Finch on a preaching trip to northern Pakistan .
At the foot of lofty mountain ranges , we found many humble Urdu - speaking villagers who thirsted for Bible truth .
Two years later , I myself was able to attend Gilead School ; I returned to Pakistan as a part - time circuit overseer .
I was based at a missionary home in Lahore , along with three other missionary brothers .

Sadly , in 1954 , the missionaries at Lahore had a clash of personalities , causing the branch office to make reassignments .
Because I had unwisely taken sides in the dispute , I received strong counsel .
I felt crushed , concluding that I was a spiritual failure .
I moved back to Karachi and then to London , England , hoping to make a fresh spiritual start .
In London , my congregation included many members of the London Bethel family .
Pryce Hughes , the kindly branch servant , took me under his wing .
One day , he told me of an occasion when he received firm counsel from Joseph F .
Rutherford , who was overseeing the worldwide preaching work .
When Brother Hughes tried to justify himself , Brother Rutherford sternly rebuked him .
I was surprised to see Brother Hughes smile at the memory .
He said that the incident upset him at first .

But later he realized that he needed the firm counsel and that it was an expression of Jehovah’s love .
His comments touched my heart and helped me regain my spiritual balance .
About that time , my mother moved to London and accepted a Bible study from John E .
Barr , who later served on the Governing Body .
She made steady spiritual progress and was baptized in 1957 .
Later I learned that before my father died , he too studied with Jehovah’s Witnesses .
In 1958 , I married Lene , a Danish sister who had settled in London .
The next year , we were blessed with a daughter , Jane , the first of our five children .
I also received privileges of service in the Fulham Congregation .

In time , however , Lene’s poor health required that we move to a warmer climate .
So in 1967 , we migrated to Adelaide , Australia .

Our congregation in Adelaide included 12 older anointed Christians .
They took a zealous lead in the preaching work .
We quickly settled into a good spiritual routine .
In 1979 , Lene and I welcomed the arrival of our fifth child , Daniel .

He was severely affected with Down syndrome * and was not expected to live long .

Even now I struggle to describe the anguish that we felt .
We threw ourselves into caring for his needs , while not neglecting our four other children .
Daniel sometimes turned blue from lack of oxygen caused by two holes in his heart , and we had to rush him to the hospital .
But despite his poor health , he was very intelligent and had a loving nature .
He was also very spiritually inclined .
When our family prayed before meals , he would clasp his tiny hands , nod his head , and say a hearty “ Amen ! ”
Only then would he eat his meal .
When Daniel was four , he developed acute leukemia .
Lene and I were physically and emotionally exhausted .
I felt that I was close to a nervous breakdown .
Yet , when we were at our lowest ebb , our circuit overseer , Neville Bromwich , arrived at our door .
That night , with tears in his eyes , he wrapped his arms around us .
We all wept .
His loving and compassionate words comforted us beyond measure .
He left about one o’clock the next morning .
Soon afterward Daniel died .
Losing him was the most traumatic event in our lives .
Nevertheless , we endured our grief , confident that nothing ​ — not even death — ​ can separate Daniel from Jehovah’s love .
How we long to be with him when he is resurrected in God’s new world ! ​ — John 5 : 28 , 29 .
Today , after surviving two major strokes , I still serve as a congregation elder .
My experiences have instilled in me empathy and compassion for others , especially those struggling with problems .
I try not to judge them .
Instead , I ask myself : ‘ How has their background shaped their emotions and thinking ?

How can I show them that I care ?
How can I encourage them to follow Jehovah’s ways ? ’
I truly love doing shepherding work in the congregation !
Indeed , when I comfort and refresh others spiritually , I sense that I am comforting and refreshing myself .
I continue to find satisfaction in making shepherding visits
I feel like the psalmist who declared : “ When anxieties overwhelmed me , [ Jehovah ] comforted and soothed me . ”

He has sustained me through family difficulties , religious opposition , personal disappointments , and depression .
Truly , Jehovah has been a real Father to me !
At first , Pakistan was composed of West Pakistan ( now Pakistan ) and East Pakistan ( now Bangladesh ) .
See the article “ Raising a Child With Down Syndrome ​ — The Challenge and the Reward ” in Awake !
of June 2011 .
Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower ?
Well , see if you can answer the following questions :
What are four things we can do to improve our singing ?
We can use good posture by holding our songbook up high .
We should breathe properly .
When we open our mouth wide and sing out , we are able to sing louder . ​ — w17.11 , p .
5 .
What should impress us about the locations and roads connected to the cities of refuge in Israel ? There were six cities of refuge distributed in the land , with good roads leading to them .
A man could thus find refuge relatively quickly and conveniently . ​ — w17.11 , p .
14 . Why is God’s gift of the ransom through Jesus the best gift we could receive ? It satisfies our desire to keep living , and it fills our need to be freed from sin and death .
Having warm feelings toward Adam’s offspring , God provided Jesus for us while we were yet sinners . ​ — wp17.6 , pp .
6 - 7 . How did Psalm 118 : 22 point to Jesus ’ resurrection ?
Jesus was rejected as the Messiah and killed .
In order for him to become “ the chief cornerstone , ” he had to be resurrected . ​ — w17.12 , pp .
9 - 10 . Was the line to the Messiah tied to the right of firstborn ?
At times the line of descent to Jesus was through the firstborn son , but not always .
David was not Jesse’s firstborn son ; yet , the Messiah descended from David . ​ — w17.12 , pp .
14 - 15 .
What are some medical principles found in the Bible ?
Under the Law , those with certain diseases were to be kept isolated . People had to wash after touching a dead body .
The Law required proper disposal of human waste .
Circumcision was to be done on the eighth day of life , which was ideal with regard to the blood’s ability to clot . ​ — wp18.1 , p . 7 .
Why is a measure of self - love fitting for a Christian ? We are to love our neighbor as ourselves . Husbands are to “ love their wives as their own bodies . ”
Of course , self - love can become distorted . ​ — w18.01 , p . 23 .
What are some steps we can take to progress spiritually ?
We need to study God’s Word and meditate on it and then apply what we learn .
We must also keep our mind and heart open to the influence of holy spirit and gratefully accept help from others . ​ — w18.02 , p .
26 .
Why are astrology and fortune - telling not keys to knowing the future ?
There are various reasons , but the prime reason is that the Bible condemns both practices . ​ — wp18.2 , pp .
4 - 5 . How should we view accepting an invitation to a meal ?
If we have accepted an invitation , we should try to be true to our word .
We should not cancel frivolously .
The host likely has worked hard to prepare the meal . ​ — w18.03 , p . 18 .
Appointed men can learn what lessons from Timothy ? Timothy truly cared for people and put spiritual interests first .
He worked hard in sacred service and applied the lessons he learned .
He kept training himself and relied on Jehovah’s spirit .
Both elders and others can imitate his example . ​ — w18.04 , pp .
13 - 14 .
3 They Offered Themselves Willingly ​ — In Myanmar
7 Whose Recognition Do You Seek ?
Many today are concerned with seeking recognition from this wicked world .
This article will discuss why we should maintain our focus on gaining the greatest form of recognition ​ — the recognition granted by Jehovah to his faithful servants .
We will also discuss how Jehovah shows this recognition , sometimes in very unexpected ways .
12 Where Are Your Eyes Looking ?
In this article , we will analyze why the faithful man Moses lost out on the privilege of entering the Promised Land .
We will also be helped to see how we can avoid falling into the trap that ensnared Moses .
17 “ Who Is on Jehovah’s Side ? ”
22 We Belong to Jehovah
Jehovah can rightfully claim ownership of all humans .
Thus , he requires our exclusive devotion .
Some individuals , though , pursue a course of disobedience while pretending to be faithful to God .
In the first article , we will draw vital lessons from the Bible accounts of Cain , Solomon , Moses , and Aaron .
In the second article , we will consider various ways that we can show appreciation for the privilege of belonging to Jehovah as his people .
27 Cultivate Compassion for “ All Sorts of People ”
30 How to Make Your Study of the Bible More Effective and Enjoyable
32 Questions From Readers
“ THE harvest is great , but the workers are few .
Therefore , beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest . ”
These words spoken by Jesus some 2,000 years ago well describe the situation in Myanmar today .
Why ?
In Myanmar , only some 4,200 publishers are spreading the good news among 55 million people .

However , “ the Master of the harvest , ” Jehovah , has touched the hearts of hundreds of brothers and sisters from different lands , and they have come to this country in Southeast Asia to assist in the spiritual harvest work .
What caused them to leave their homeland ?
How were they helped to make the move ?
And what blessings are they enjoying ?
Let us find out .
Some years ago , Kazuhiro , a pioneer in Japan , had an epileptic seizure , lost consciousness , and was taken to a hospital .
The doctor told him not to drive for two years .

Kazuhiro was shocked .
‘ How can I keep on doing what I love ​ — pioneering ? ’ he asked himself .
He prayed fervently , begging Jehovah to open the way for him to continue serving as a pioneer .
Kazuhiro and Mari
Kazuhiro relates : “ A month later , my friend who was serving in Myanmar heard of my plight . He called me and said : ‘ In Myanmar the basic transportation is the bus . If you come here , you can continue your field service without the need of a car ! ’
I asked my doctor if my condition would allow me to go to Myanmar .
To my surprise , the doctor said : ‘ A brain specialist from Myanmar is visiting Japan right now .
I will introduce you to him .
If you ever again have a seizure , he can take care of you . ’
I took the doctor’s reply as an answer from Jehovah . ”
Immediately , Kazuhiro sent an e - mail to the Myanmar branch office and expressed his and his wife’s desire to serve in that land as pioneers .
Just five days later , the branch responded , “ Come , we need more pioneers ! ”
Kazuhiro and his wife , Mari , sold their cars , obtained their visas , and bought plane tickets .
Today , they happily serve with the sign - language group in Mandalay .
Kazuhiro says : “ Through this experience , we feel that our faith in God’s promise found at Psalm 37 : 5 has been strengthened : ‘ Commit your way to Jehovah ; rely on him , and he will act in your behalf . ’ ”
In 2014 , Jehovah’s Witnesses in Myanmar had the privilege of hosting a special convention .
A number of foreign delegates attended the event .
One of them , Monique , a sister in her mid - 30 ’ s from the United States , says : “ After returning from the convention , I prayed to Jehovah about the next step I needed to take in my life .
Also , I talked with my parents about my spiritual goals .


We all felt that I should return to Myanmar , but it took some time and many prayers before I reached my final decision . ”
Monique explains why .
Monique and Li
“ Jesus encouraged his followers to ‘ calculate the expense . ’
So I asked myself : ‘ Can I afford to make this move ?
Will I be able to support myself in that country without spending more time on secular work ? ’ ”
She admits : “ I quickly realized that I didn’t have enough money to move to the other side of the world . ”
So , then , how was she able to move ? ​ — Luke 14 : 28 .
Monique relates : “ One day my employer asked to see me .


I was nervous , thinking that I would be laid off .
But , instead , my employer thanked me for my good work .
Then she told me that she had arranged for me to receive a bonus , which turned out to be the exact amount of money that I needed to free myself of my financial obligations ! ”
Monique has been serving in Myanmar since December 2014 .
How does she feel about her ministry as a need - greater ?
“ I am so happy to be here , ” she says .
“ I am conducting three Bible studies . One of my students is 67 years old .
She always greets me with a smile and a big hug .
When she learned that God’s name is Jehovah , she was moved to tears .
She said : ‘ This is the first time in my life that I have heard that God’s name is Jehovah .
You are a whole lifetime younger than I am , but you have taught me the most important thing I could ever learn . ’
Needless to say , I too was in tears .
Experiences such as this one make serving where the need is greater a very satisfying life . ”
Recently , Monique had the privilege of attending the School for Kingdom Evangelizers .
Another incentive for some to come to Myanmar was the 2013 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses account about this country .
A sister in her early 30 ’ s named Li already lived in Southeast Asia .
She had a full - time job , but the Yearbook account prompted her to consider serving in Myanmar .
“ In 2014 when I attended the special convention in Yangon , I met a married couple serving as need - greaters in the Chinese field in Myanmar .
Since I speak Chinese , I decided to move to Myanmar to support the Chinese group there .
I teamed up with Monique , and we moved to Mandalay .
Jehovah blessed us with finding part - time teaching jobs at the same school , and we found an apartment nearby .
Despite the hot weather and some inconveniences , I enjoy my service here .
People in Myanmar live a simple life , but they are polite and willing to take the time to listen to the good news .
It is very exciting to see how Jehovah is speeding up the work .
I firmly believe that it is Jehovah’s will for me to be right here in Mandalay . ”
A number of need - greaters experienced the power of prayer .
Take Jumpei and his wife , Nao , both in their mid - 30 ’ s .
They were already serving in a sign - language congregation in Japan .

Why did they move to Myanmar ?
Jumpei relates : “ My wife and I always had the goal of serving as need - greaters in a foreign country .
A brother from our sign - language congregation in Japan moved to Myanmar .
Though we had only a small amount of money saved , in May 2010 we too moved .
The brothers and sisters in Myanmar gave us a warm welcome ! ”
How does he feel about the sign - language field in Myanmar ?

“ The interest is great .
When we show the sign - language videos , the deaf householders are amazed .
We are so glad that we made the decision to come to serve Jehovah here ! ”
Nao and Jumpei
How have Jumpei and Nao coped financially ?
“ After three years , we had used up most of our savings and did not have enough money to pay the rent for the next year .
My wife and I said many earnest prayers .
Unexpectedly , we received a letter from the branch office inviting us to take up temporary special pioneer service !

We trusted in Jehovah , and we experienced that he did not abandon us .
He has been caring for us in every way . ”
Recently , Jumpei and Nao also attended the School for Kingdom Evangelizers .
What prompted Simone , a brother in his mid - 40 ’ s , originally from Italy , and his wife , Anna , a sister in her late 30 ’ s , originally from New Zealand , to move to Myanmar ?
“ It was the 2013 Yearbook account on Myanmar ! ” answers Anna .
Simone says : “ It is a great privilege to be in Myanmar .
Life here is so much simpler , and I can give more time to Jehovah’s work .
It is thrilling to experience the care that Jehovah gives us when we serve in an area of greater need . ”
Anna says : “ I am happier than I have ever been .
We have a simple life .
I spend more time with my husband , and we have become closer .
We have also found precious new friends .
People are not prejudiced toward the Witnesses , and the interest in the field is amazing ! ”
In what ways ?
Simone and Anna
Anna relates : “ One day , I witnessed to a university student at the market and arranged to meet her again .
When I did , she had brought a friend with her .
The next time , she brought a few more .
Later , she brought even more people .
Now I am studying with five of them . ”
Simone says : “ People in the field are friendly and curious . Many are interested .
We simply don’t have enough time to take care of all the interest . ”
Sachio and Mizuho
But what about the practical steps involved in making the decision to move to Myanmar ? Mizuho , from Japan , relates : “ My husband , Sachio , and I always wanted to serve in a country where the need was greater ​ — but where ?
After reading the 2013 Yearbook account about Myanmar , we were so touched by the heartwarming experiences that we began to consider if serving in Myanmar would be possible for us . ”
Adds Sachio : “ We decided to make a one - week tour of Yangon , the main city in Myanmar , to spy out the land , so to speak .

That short fact - finding trip convinced us that we should move here . ”
Jane , Danica , Rodney , and Jordan
Rodney and his wife , Jane , from Australia , both in their 50 ’ s , and their son , Jordan , and daughter , Danica , have been serving as need - greaters in Myanmar since 2010 .
Rodney says : “ We were deeply moved by the spiritual hunger of the people .
I would absolutely recommend to other families that they try to serve in a place like Myanmar . ”
Why ?
“ What this has done for our family spiritually is priceless !
Many young ones are preoccupied with their phones , cars , jobs , and so on .
Our children are busy learning new words to use in the ministry .
They try to learn how to reason with those who are not familiar with the Bible and how to give an answer during the meetings of the local congregation , and they are absorbed in many other exciting spiritual activities . ”
Oliver and Anna
Oliver , a brother in his late 30 ’ s from the United States , explains why he recommends this type of service : “ Serving Jehovah outside my comfort zone has had many benefits .

Moving away from home helped me to build my confidence and trust in Jehovah no matter what circumstances I find myself in .
Serving with those whom I had not known before but who have the same beliefs that I do has really helped me to see that there is simply nothing in this world that compares in importance to God’s Kingdom . ”
Today , Oliver and his wife , Anna , continue to serve zealously in the Chinese - language field .
Trazel
Trazel , a sister in her early 50 ’ s from Australia , has been serving in Myanmar since 2004 .
She says : “ To those whose circumstances allow , I highly recommend serving where the need is greater .
I have experienced that if you have the will to serve , Jehovah blesses your efforts .

I never dreamed I would be living like this .
It is the most rewarding and satisfying life I could ever wish for . ”
May these heartfelt words of need - greaters in Myanmar encourage you to consider helping honesthearted people in untouched territories .
Yes , the need - greaters are calling out , “ Please , step over into Myanmar and help us ! ”
“ God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name . ” ​ — HEB .
6 : 10 .
SONGS : 39 , 30
What is the greatest form of recognition ?
What should we remember about the recognition Jehovah grants ?
How did Jehovah show recognition to both Mary and Jesus ?
What natural desire do we all have , and what does it include ?
HOW do you feel when someone you know and respect forgets your name or , worse still , does not even recognize you ? Such an experience can be very discouraging .
Why ? It is because each one of us has a natural desire to be accepted .
The type of recognition we desire goes beyond being identified by others ; we also want some acknowledgment of who we are and what we have accomplished . ​ — Num . 11 : 16 ; ftn . ; Job 31 : 6 .
2 , 3 .
How can the desire to be appreciated become distorted ?
( See opening picture . )
Like many other natural desires , though , our desire to be appreciated can become unbalanced , distorted by our imperfections .
It can make us crave inappropriate expressions of recognition .
Satan’s world fuels a desire for fame and acknowledgment that distracts attention from the one who truly deserves to be recognized and worshipped , our heavenly Father , Jehovah God . ​ — Rev .
4 : 11 .
In Jesus ’ day , some religious leaders had the wrong view of recognition .
Jesus warned his followers : “ Beware of the scribes who like to walk around in robes and who love greetings in the marketplaces and front [ “ best , ” ftn . ] seats in the synagogues and the most prominent places at evening meals . ”
He went on to say : “ These will receive a more severe judgment . ”
By contrast , Jesus commended a poor widow whose small contribution was likely not recognized by others .
Jesus ’ view of recognition was obviously very different from that of others .
This article will help us maintain the right view , the one that Jehovah God accepts .

What is the greatest form of recognition , and why ?
What , then , is the greatest form of recognition that we can strive for ?
It is not the kind of attention that people seek in the academic , business , and entertainment fields of this world .
Rather , it is the kind that Paul described for us in these words : “ Now that you have come to know God or , rather , have come to be known by God , how is it that you are turning back again to the weak and beggarly elementary things and want to slave for them over again ? ”
What a wonderful privilege it is to “ come to be known by God , ” the Supreme Ruler of the universe !

He is willing to have an intimate relationship with us .
As one scholar stated , we “ become objects of his favourable attention . ”
When Jehovah acknowledges us as his friends , we achieve the very reason for our existence . ​ — Eccl .
12 : 13 , 14 .
How do we put ourselves in a position to be known by God ?
Moses experienced such a blessing .
When he pleaded with Jehovah to allow him to come to know His ways more fully , Jehovah replied : “ I will also do this thing that you request , because you have found favor in my eyes and I know you by name . ”
We likewise can receive wonderful blessings when Jehovah comes to know us personally .
But how can we put ourselves in a position to be known by Jehovah ?
We do that when we come to love him and dedicate our life to him . ​ — Read 1 Corinthians 8 : 3 .
6 , 7 .
What could cause us to lose our relationship with Jehovah ?

However , we need to maintain our treasured relationship with our heavenly Father .
Like the Galatian Christians to whom Paul wrote , we too need to avoid slaving for “ the weak and beggarly elementary things ” of this world , including seeking its acclaim .
Those first - century Christians had progressed to the point of being known by God .
However , Paul said that the very same brothers were “ turning back again ” to empty things .
Paul was , in effect , saying : “ After you have come so far , why would you return to the foolish , valueless things you left behind ? ”
Could we find ourselves in a similar position today ?
Yes , we could .
When we first came to know Jehovah , we , like Paul , may have given up prominence in Satan’s world .
( Read Philippians 3 : 7 , 8 . )
Perhaps we gave up opportunities to receive higher education , or we may have turned down promotions or the possibility for making more money in the business world .
Our musical talents or athletic abilities could have potentially led us to fame and wealth , but we turned our backs on all of that .
How unwise it would be for us now to view such good decisions as ‘ missed opportunities ’ !


Such thinking might lead us to seek out what we already determined were among “ the weak and beggarly ” elements of this world .
* What will strengthen our resolve to seek Jehovah’s recognition ?
How can we strengthen our resolve to seek Jehovah’s recognition and not that of the world ?
To do so , we need to remember two important facts .
First , Jehovah always gives recognition to those who serve him faithfully .
( Read Hebrews 6 : 10 ; 11 : 6 ) He deeply appreciates every one of his servants , and he views it as “ unrighteous ” to ignore those who are faithful to him .
Jehovah always “ knows those who belong to him . ”

He is “ aware of the way of the righteous ” and knows how to rescue them out of trial . ​ — Ps . 1 : 6 ; 2 Pet . 2 : 9 .
Give examples of how Jehovah has shown his approval of his people .
At times , Jehovah has shown his approval of his people in outstanding ways .
Take , for example , the way Jehovah saved his people at the Red Sea when they were being pursued by Pharaoh’s mighty army .
This event was so spectacular that people in that part of the world were still speaking about it 40 years later .
How encouraging it is for us to remember such displays of Jehovah’s love and power as we face the long - foretold attack by Gog of Magog !
At that time , we will be especially grateful that we sought the recognition of our God and not that of the world .

What aspect of Jehovah’s recognition must we keep in mind ?
We also need to keep in mind a second important fact : Jehovah may give us recognition in ways we may never expect .
Those who do good deeds purely to be seen by men are told that they will have no reward at all from Jehovah .
Why ?
Their reward has already been paid in full when they receive praise from others .
( Read Matthew 6 : 1 - 5 . )
However , Jesus said that his Father “ looks on in secret ” at those who do not receive due credit for the good they do to others .

He notices those acts and repays each person accordingly .
However , at times Jehovah rewards us in unexpected ways .
Let us consider some examples .
How did Jehovah show recognition to the young woman Mary ?
When it came time for God’s Son to be born as a human , Jehovah selected a humble virgin girl , Mary , to be the mother of this special child .
Mary lived in the insignificant city of Nazareth , far from Jerusalem and its magnificent temple .
( Read Luke 1 : 26 - 33 . )
Why was Mary chosen for this privilege ?
She was told by the angel Gabriel that she had “ found favor with God . ”

Mary revealed her deep spirituality when she later spoke to her relative Elizabeth .
Yes , Jehovah had been observing Mary , and he granted her this unexpected privilege because of her faithfulness .
12 , 13 .
In what way was due recognition given at the time of Jesus ’ birth and when he was taken to the temple 40 days later ?
When Mary eventually gave birth to Jesus , Jehovah did not honor any of the prominent officials or rulers in Jerusalem and Bethlehem by letting them know what had happened .
Angels appeared to lowly shepherds who were caring for sheep in the fields outside Bethlehem .
These shepherds then visited the newborn baby .
How pleasantly surprised Mary and Joseph must have been to see Jesus honored in such a manner !
Consider the contrast between Jehovah’s way of doing things and that of the Devil .
When Satan sent astrologers to visit Jesus and his parents , all of Jerusalem became agitated at the news of Jesus ’ birth .
This very public announcement of Jesus ’ birth ultimately resulted in the death of many innocent children . ​ — Matt .
2 : 16 . Forty days after Jesus ’ birth , Mary was required to present an offering to Jehovah at the temple in Jerusalem , about six miles ( 9 km ) from Bethlehem .

As Mary traveled with Joseph and Jesus , she may have wondered if the officiating priest would make some special acknowledgment of Jesus ’ future role .
Recognition did come , but not in the way Mary may have expected .
Instead , Jehovah used a “ righteous and devout ” man named Simeon , along with an 84 - year - old widow , the prophetess Anna , to acknowledge that this child would become the promised Messiah , or Christ . ​ — Luke 2 : 25 - 38 .
What blessings did Mary receive from Jehovah ?
What about Mary ?
Did Jehovah continue to show her due recognition for faithfully caring for and raising his Son ?
Yes , he did . God had her actions and words recorded in the Bible .
Apparently , Mary was not in a position to travel with Jesus during the three and a half years of his ministry .

Perhaps as a widow , Mary had to stay in Nazareth .
But even though she missed out on many privileges , she was able to be with Jesus at the time of his death .
Later , though , Mary was in Jerusalem along with the disciples during the days leading up to Pentecost when holy spirit was poured out .
She was likely anointed along with the others present .
If so , this would mean that she was given the opportunity to be in heaven with Jesus for all eternity .
What a beautiful reward for her faithful service !
While Jesus was on earth , how did Jehovah show his approval of his Son ?
Jesus did not crave to be honored by the religious or political leaders of his day .
But how encouraged he must have been when Jehovah acknowledged him on three separate occasions by speaking directly from heaven .
Just after Jesus ’ baptism in the Jordan River , Jehovah said : “ This is my Son , the beloved , whom I have approved . ”
Evidently , John the Baptist was the only other person who heard those words .
Then , about a year before Jesus ’ death , three of his apostles heard Jehovah say about Jesus : “ This is my Son , the beloved , whom I have approved .
Listen to him . ”
Finally , just a few days before Jesus ’ death , Jehovah again spoke to his Son from heaven . ​ — John 12 : 28 .
What do you learn from the way Jehovah showed his Son due recognition ?
( See paragraphs 15 - 17 )
16 , 17 .
How did Jehovah honor Jesus in an unexpected manner ?
Even though Jesus knew that he would experience a shameful death , falsely branded as a blasphemer , he prayed that Jehovah’s will be done and not his .
“ He endured a torture stake , despising shame , ” not seeking recognition from the world , but only from his Father .
How did Jehovah show that recognition ?
While on earth , Jesus expressed his desire to return to the glory he once had in heaven with his Father .
Nothing indicates that Jesus was hoping for more than that .
He was not expecting some sort of heavenly “ upgrade . ”

But what did Jehovah do ?
He honored Jesus in an unexpected way by resurrecting him to “ a superior position ” and giving him what no one else had received up until that time ​ — immortal spirit life !
* What an outstanding acknowledgment of Jesus ’ faithful course !
What will help us to avoid seeking approval from this world ?
What will help us to avoid seeking approval from this world ?
Keep close in mind that Jehovah always gives recognition to his faithful servants and that he often rewards them in unexpected ways .
Who knows what unexpected blessings await us in the future ?
But for now , as we endure the hardships and trials of this wicked world , let us always remember that this world , along with any recognition it may offer , is passing away .
Our loving Father , Jehovah , ‘ is not unrighteous so as to forget our work and the love we show for his name . ’
Yes , he will show us favor ​ — perhaps even in ways we cannot imagine now !
In other Bible translations , the word for “ beggarly ” is rendered “ useless , ” “ bankrupt , ” “ destitute , ” and “ miserable . ”
This may have been an unexpected blessing , since immortality is not mentioned in the Hebrew Scriptures .
“ To you I raise my eyes , you who are enthroned in the heavens . ” ​ — PS .
123 : 1 .
SONGS : 143 , 124
In what sense should our eyes look to Jehovah ?
Why did Moses lose his privilege of entering the Promised Land ?
What lessons do we learn from what happened to Moses ?
1 , 2 .
What is involved in fixing our eyes on Jehovah ?
WE ARE living in “ critical times ” that are “ hard to deal with , ” and life is going to become even more difficult before a new day dawns and true peace is restored to this earth .
So we do well to ask ourselves , ‘ Where am I looking for help and direction ? ’
Our immediate answer may be , “ To Jehovah , ” and that is the best response .

What is involved in looking to Jehovah ?
And how can we make sure that our eyes remain fixed on him as we face life’s complex challenges ?
Centuries ago , a psalmist acknowledged the need for us to raise our eyes to Jehovah for help in times of need .
( Read Psalm 123 : 1 - 4 . )
He compared our looking to Jehovah with the way a servant looks to his master . What did the psalmist mean by that ?
Well , not only does a servant look to his master for food and protection but the servant needs constantly to watch his master to discern his wishes and then to carry them out .
In a similar way , we daily need to search God’s Word to ascertain what Jehovah’s will is for us personally and then to follow that direction .

Only then can we be sure that Jehovah will show us favor in our time of need . ​ — Eph . 5 : 17 .
What can distract us from keeping our eyes fixed on Jehovah ?
Although we know the importance of continually looking to Jehovah , we may at times become distracted .
That is exactly what happened to Jesus ’ close friend Martha .
She became “ distracted with attending to many duties . ”
If that could happen to such a faithful person when Jesus was physically with her , we should not be surprised if the same thing could happen to us .
What , then , can distract us from keeping our eyes fixed on Jehovah ?
In this article , we will examine how the actions of others could distract us .
We will also learn how to remain focused on Jehovah .
Why might we be surprised that Moses lost the privilege of entering the Promised Land ?
Moses certainly looked to Jehovah for direction and guidance .
Indeed , “ he continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible . ”
( Read Hebrews 11 : 24 - 27 . )
The Bible record tells us that “ there has never again arisen a prophet in Israel like Moses , whom Jehovah knew face - to - face . ”
But even though Moses had such a close relationship with Jehovah , he still lost the privilege of entering the Promised Land .
What caused Moses to stumble ?
5 - 7 .
What problem arose shortly after the Israelites left Egypt , and how did Moses handle the situation ?
Less than two months after the Israelites left Egypt , a serious problem arose ​ — even before they arrived at Mount Sinai .
The people started to complain about a lack of water .
They began to murmur against Moses , and the situation became so serious that Moses cried out to Jehovah : “ What should I do with this people ?
A little longer and they will stone me ! ”
Jehovah responded by giving Moses clear instructions .
He was to take his rod and strike the rock in Horeb , and then water would come gushing out .
We read : “ Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel . ”
The Israelites drank their fill , and the problem was solved . ​ — Ex . 17 : 5 , 6 .
The inspired record goes on to tell us that Moses “ named the place Massah and Meribah because of the quarreling of the Israelites and because they put Jehovah to the test by saying : ‘ Is Jehovah in our midst or not ? ’ ”
Those names were appropriate because they mean “ Testing ” and “ Quarreling . ”
How did Jehovah feel about what happened there at Meribah ?
He viewed the actions of the Israelites as a challenge to his Godship , not just a rebellion against Moses .
( Read Psalm 95 : 8 , 9 . )
The Israelites were clearly in the wrong .
On that occasion , Moses reacted correctly by looking to Jehovah and then carefully following his direction .
What problem arose toward the end of the 40 - year journey through the wilderness ?
What happened , though , when a similar event occurred some 40 years later , toward the end of the journey through the wilderness ?
The Israelites again found themselves in a location that came to be called Meribah .
But this was a different site , one near Kadesh , close to the border of the Promised Land .
* The Israelites once again complained about the lack of water .
But on this occasion , things turned out differently for Moses .
What instructions did Moses receive , but what did he do ?
( See opening picture . )
How did Moses react to this rebellion ?
Once again he turned his eyes to Jehovah for direction .
But this time Jehovah did not tell him to strike the rock .
Moses was told to take his rod , gather the people before the crag , and then speak to the crag .
Moses did not , however , speak to that rock , or crag .
Rather , he vented his frustration by shouting out to those gathered there : “ Hear , now , you rebels !
Must we bring out water for you from this crag ? ”
He then struck the crag not just once but twice . ​ — Num .
20 : 10 , 11 .
How did Jehovah react to Moses ’ actions ?
Jehovah became angry , even furious , with Moses .
Why did Jehovah react in that way ?
A number of factors may have been involved . As mentioned above , Jehovah may have been indignant because Moses failed to follow the new directions he had received .
How might Moses ’ action of striking the rock have detracted from the miracle Jehovah performed ?
There is another possibility .
Rock formations around the location of the first Meribah are solid granite .
Regardless of how hard someone strikes granite , no one expects water to flow from it .
However , cliff formations around the second Meribah are very different , usually consisting of softer limestone .
Because of the porous nature of limestone , such areas often have underground reservoirs of water that can be tapped as a water supply .
Could it be that when Moses struck such porous rock twice , he opened himself up to the accusation that the resulting flow of water was due to natural causes rather than to Jehovah ?
By striking the rock instead of speaking to it , was Moses , as it were , taking some of the miracle out of the miracle ?
* We cannot be certain .
For what other reason might Jehovah have been angry with Moses and Aaron ?
There is another plausible explanation for Jehovah’s anger with Moses as well as Aaron .
Notice what Moses said to the people : “ Must we bring out water for you from this crag ? ”
By using the word “ we , ” Moses was likely referring to himself and Aaron .
Those words indicated a gross lack of respect for Jehovah as the true Source of that miracle .
This possibility seems to be confirmed by what we read at Psalm 106 : 32 , 33 : “ They provoked Him at the waters of Meribah , and it went badly for Moses because of them .
They embittered his spirit , and he spoke rashly with his lips . ”
* Whatever the case , Moses ’ actions detracted from the honor due Jehovah .
Speaking to Moses and Aaron , Jehovah said : “ You both rebelled against my order . ”
A serious sin indeed ! Why was the judgment Jehovah made concerning Moses both appropriate and consistent ?
As leaders among Jehovah’s people , Moses and Aaron had a greater measure of accountability .
Previously , Jehovah had denied a whole generation of Israelites entrance into the land of Canaan because of their rebelliousness .
So it was both appropriate and consistent for Jehovah to make the same judgment with regard to Moses because of his rebellious act .
Just like the other rebels , he was not allowed to enter the Promised Land .
14 , 15 .
What caused Moses to rebel ?
What led Moses to adopt such a rebellious attitude ?
Notice Psalm 106 : 32 , 33 once again : “ They provoked Him at the waters of Meribah , and it went badly for Moses because of them .
They embittered his spirit , and he spoke rashly with his lips . ”
Although the Israelites provoked Jehovah , it was Moses who became embittered .
His lack of self - control led him to speak without considering the consequences .
Moses allowed the actions of others to distract him from keeping his eyes fixed on Jehovah .
Moses handled the first incident correctly .
Yet , it is possible that after dealing for decades with the rebellious Israelites , he had become tired and frustrated .
Was Moses thinking mainly of his own feelings instead of how he could glorify Jehovah ?
Why should we be concerned about Moses ’ actions ?
If such a faithful prophet as Moses could be distracted and stumbled , the same thing could easily happen to us .
Like Moses , we are about to enter a symbolic land , the new world that Jehovah has promised us .
None of us want to miss out on that special privilege .
To fulfill our goal , though , we need to keep our eyes fixed on Jehovah , always seeking to do his will .
What lessons should we learn from Moses ’ mistake ?
What will help us not to give in to frustration ?
Do not give in to frustration .

Even when we find ourselves dealing with the same problems over and over again , “ let us not give up in doing what is fine , for in due time we will reap if we do not tire out . ”
When faced with frustrating situations or recurring personality conflicts , do we control our lips and our temper ?
When provoked by others , we need to learn to “ yield place to the wrath . ” Whose wrath ? Jehovah’s wrath .
( Read Romans 12 : 17 - 21 . )
If we keep looking to Jehovah , we will show him due respect by yielding to his wrath , patiently waiting for him to take action when he deems it necessary .
To do otherwise and avenge ourselves in some way would be tantamount to disrespecting Jehovah .
What do we need to remember when it comes to following directions ?
Carefully follow the latest directions .
Do we faithfully follow the latest directions that Jehovah has given us ?
If so , we will not rely on always doing things the way we have done them in the past .
Rather , we will be quick to follow any new direction that Jehovah provides through his organization .
At the same time , we will be careful that we “ do not go beyond the things that are written . ”
In so doing , we keep our eyes fixed on Jehovah .
What lesson should we learn from Moses ’ reaction to the mistakes of others ?
( See paragraph 19 )
How can we avoid damaging our relationship with Jehovah even though we may be dealing with the mistakes of others ?
Do not allow the mistakes of others to damage your relationship with Jehovah .
If we keep our figurative eyes focused on Jehovah , we will not allow the actions of others to embitter us or damage our relationship with him .
This is especially important if , like Moses , we have a measure of responsibility in God’s organization .
While it is true that each of us needs to ‘ keep working out his own salvation with fear and trembling , ’ we must remember that Jehovah does not have one rigid , inflexible standard by which he judges us .
Rather , the more responsibility we have , the greater our accountability .
But if we truly love Jehovah , nothing will stumble us or separate us from his love . ​ — Ps .
119 : 165 ; Rom . 8 : 37 - 39 .

What should be our determination ?
In these challenging times , may our eyes be raised continually to the One who is “ enthroned in the heavens , ” so that we can perceive his will .
May we never allow our relationship with Jehovah to be negatively affected by the actions of others .
The example of what happened to Moses reinforces the importance of this in our mind and heart .
Rather than overreacting to the imperfections of those around us , let it be our determination that “ our eyes look to Jehovah our God until he shows us favor . ” ​ — Ps .
123 : 1 , 2 .
This was a different location from the Meribah that was near Rephidim .
Unlike the first location , this second site was associated with Kadesh , not Massah .
However , both locations were named Meribah because of the quarreling that occurred there . ​ — See the map in Appendix B3 in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
Professor John A .
Beck says of this account : “ According to one Jewish tradition , the rebels criticize Moses with these words : ‘ Moses knows the properties of this particular rock !
If he wishes to prove his miraculous powers , let him bring out water for us from this other one . ’ ”
This is , of course , only a tradition .
See The Watchtower , October 15 , 1987 , “ Questions From Readers . ”
Yes , if there are no extenuating circumstances , a judicial committee would be formed on the basis of strong circumstantial evidence of sexual immorality . ​ — 1 Cor .
6 : 18 . The body of elders carefully evaluates each situation to determine whether a judicial committee is warranted .
For example : Have the couple been pursuing a romantic relationship ?
Have they been previously counseled regarding their conduct with each other ?
What circumstances led to their spending the night together ?
Did they plan ahead to do so ?
Did they have a choice in the matter , or were there extenuating circumstances , perhaps an unforeseen occurrence or genuine emergency that left them with no choice but to spend the night together ?
What were the sleeping arrangements ?

Since each situation is different , there may be other relevant factors that the elders will consider .
After the facts are established , the body of elders will determine whether the couple’s conduct warrants judicial action .
© 2018 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
COVER IMAGE :
This reenactment shows the circumstances under which a Bible study is conducted in Bulgarian prisons with interested inmates
PUBLISHERS
BIBLE STUDIES
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE ( 2017 )
This publication is not for sale .
It is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .
To make a donation , please visit www.jw.org .


Unless otherwise indicated , Scripture quotations are from the modern - language New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures .
“ Jehovah your God you should fear , him you should serve , to him you should cling . ” ​ — DEUT .
10 : 20 .
SONGS : 28 , 32
While professing to worship Jehovah , how did Cain and Solomon lose Jehovah’s favor ?
How did Moses and Aaron seize opportunities to show that they were on Jehovah’s side ?
How can we fully benefit from Jehovah’s mercy and forgiveness ?
1 , 2 . ( a ) Why is it wise to be on Jehovah’s side ?
( b ) What will we consider in this article ?
IT MAKES sense to cling to Jehovah . No one is more powerful , wise , or loving than our God !
Who of us would not want to be on his side ?
Still , some of God’s worshippers have wavered when a situation called for them to take sides with Jehovah .
In this article , we will consider examples of individuals who claimed to be on Jehovah’s side while at the same time following a course that offended him .
These accounts contain vital lessons that can help us remain fully loyal to Jehovah .
Why did Jehovah reach out to Cain , and what did He tell him ?
Consider the case of Cain .
He did not profess to worship any other god but Jehovah .
Cain’s worship , however , was not acceptable to God .
There were seeds of wickedness growing deep within his heart .
Jehovah reached out to Cain and told him : “ If you turn to doing good , will you not be restored to favor ? But if you do not turn to doing good , sin is crouching at the door , and its craving is to dominate you ; but will you get the mastery over it ? ”
Jehovah was , in effect , telling Cain , “ If you repent and take a firm stand on my side , I will , in turn , be on your side . ”
Given the opportunity to be on Jehovah’s side , what did Cain do ?
If only Cain would correct his thinking , Jehovah would restore him to favor .
But Cain did not listen to the counsel .
Wrong thinking and selfish desire led him to wrong actions .
In his youth , Cain may never have imagined that he would take a stand against Jehovah .
In time , however , he did the unimaginable ​ — he rebelled against God and killed his own brother !
What kind of thinking could cause us to lose Jehovah’s favor ?
Like Cain , a Christian today could be following the wrong path even while professing to worship Jehovah .
For instance , one could nurture immoral fantasies , greedy thoughts , or hateful feelings toward a fellow Christian .
This thinking can lead to sinful actions . All the while , one could be active in the ministry and regular at congregation meetings .
Other humans may not be aware of our thoughts and conduct , but Jehovah sees all things and knows if we are not wholeheartedly on his side . ​ — Read Jeremiah 17 : 9 , 10 .
How does Jehovah help us to “ get the mastery over ” sinful inclinations when we take a firm stand on his side ?
Even so , Jehovah is not quick to give up on us . When a person’s steps lead him away from God , Jehovah urges him : “ Return to me , and I will return to you . ”
Especially when we struggle with weaknesses , Jehovah wants us to take a stand against badness .
If we do , he will in turn prove to be on our side by giving us the spiritual , emotional , and physical strength needed to “ get the mastery over ” our sinful inclinations . ​ — Gen .
4 : 7 .
How did Solomon lose his good standing with Jehovah ?
We can learn much from the example of King Solomon .
During his younger years , Solomon looked to Jehovah for guidance .
God gave him great wisdom and entrusted him with the building of a magnificent temple in Jerusalem .
But Solomon lost his friendship with Jehovah .
God’s Law specifically prohibited a Hebrew king from taking “ many wives for himself , so that his heart [ might ] not go astray . ”
Solomon disobeyed , eventually marrying 700 women .
He brought into his household an additional 300 concubines .
Many of his wives were non - Israelites , who worshipped false gods .
Hence , Solomon also disobeyed God’s law against marrying foreign women . ​ — Deut . 7 : 3 , 4 .
To what extreme did Solomon offend Jehovah ?
Solomon’s gradual departure from Jehovah’s requirements led him in time to extreme wrongdoing .
Solomon built an altar to the idol goddess Ashtoreth and at least one other altar to the false god Chemosh .
There he joined his wives in pagan worship .
He built those altars on , of all places , a mountain located directly in front of Jerusalem , where he had built Jehovah’s temple !
Perhaps Solomon fooled himself into thinking that Jehovah would overlook his disobedience as long as he also continued to offer sacrifices at the temple .
What resulted from Solomon’s disregard for God’s warnings ?
But Jehovah never overlooks wrongdoing .
The Bible reports : “ Jehovah became furious at Solomon , because his heart had inclined away from Jehovah . . . , who had appeared to him twice and had warned him about this very thing , that he should not go after other gods .
But he did not obey what Jehovah had commanded . ”
As a result , God withdrew his approval and support .
Solomon’s heirs lost the unified kingdom of Israel and suffered many calamities for generations to come . ​ — 1 Ki .
11 : 9 - 13 . What can threaten our good standing with Jehovah ?
As in Solomon’s case , one of the greatest threats to spirituality is friendship with those who do not understand or respect Jehovah’s standards .
Some may be associated with the congregation but may be spiritually weak .
Others could be relatives , neighbors , coworkers , or schoolmates who are not worshippers of Jehovah .
In any case , if our close associates do not show a high regard for Jehovah’s standards , they can in time destroy our good standing with God .
What effect are your associates having on your relationship with Jehovah ?
( See paragraph 11 )
What can help us to determine whether an associate should be avoided ?
Read 1 Corinthians 15 : 33 .
Most people have some good qualities , and many outside the congregation do not engage in blatant misconduct .
If that is true of your acquaintances , can you assume that they are good associations ?
Ask yourself what effect their companionship will have on your relationship with Jehovah .
Will they improve it ?
What is in their heart ?
For example , are their conversations almost exclusively about fashion , money , gadgets , entertainment , or other material pursuits ?
Does their speech often include disparaging comments about others or obscene jesting ?
Jesus aptly warned : “ Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks . ”
If you realize that your associates pose a threat to your good standing with Jehovah , act decisively by limiting and if necessary ending such friendships . ​ — Prov . 13 : 20 .
( a ) What did Jehovah make clear to the Israelites shortly after they left Egypt ?
( b ) How did the Israelites respond to God’s requirement for exclusive devotion ?
Additional lessons can be learned from what took place shortly after the Israelites were freed from Egypt .
The people gathered in front of Mount Sinai . There Jehovah made his presence strikingly real . A miraculous dark cloud formed .
Jehovah produced thunder , lightning , smoke , and what seemed to be the loud and constant sound of a horn .
In this setting , Jehovah revealed himself to the Israelites as “ a God who requires exclusive devotion . ”
He assured them that he would be loyal to those who love him and keep his commandments .
( Read Exodus 20 : 1 - 6 . )
In effect , Jehovah was telling his people , “ If you prove to be on my side , I will prove to be on your side . ”
How would you respond to such a promise of loyalty from Jehovah God ?
You would surely do as the Israelites did . They “ answered with one voice : ‘ All the words that Jehovah has spoken , we are willing to do . ’ ”
Soon , however , something unexpected put the Israelites ’ loyalty to the test .
What circumstances put the loyalty of the Israelites to the test ?
The Israelites had been frightened by the dark cloud , the lightning , and the other awe - inspiring signs from God .
At their request , Moses agreed to be their spokesperson for all communication with Jehovah on Mount Sinai .
Moses was on the mountaintop for a long time .
Were the Israelites now stranded in the wilderness without their trustworthy leader ?
Apparently , the people’s faith was too dependent on Moses ’ visible presence .
They became anxious and told Aaron : “ Make for us a god who will go ahead of us , because we do not know what has happened to this Moses , the man who led us up out of the land of Egypt . ” ​ — Ex . 32 : 1 , 2 .
What did the Israelites fool themselves into thinking , and what was Jehovah’s reaction ?
The people knew that idolatry was a serious offense against Jehovah .
But soon they were worshipping a golden calf !
Despite this obvious act of disobedience , the Israelites somehow fooled themselves into thinking that they were still on Jehovah’s side .
Why , Aaron even called their calf worship “ a festival to Jehovah ” !
How did Jehovah react ?
He felt betrayed .
Jehovah told Moses that the people had “ corrupted themselves ” and had “ deviated from the way [ He ] commanded them to go . ”
In his “ burning anger , ” Jehovah even considered wiping out the newly formed nation of Israel . ​ — Ex .
32 : 5 - 10 .
15 , 16 .
How did Moses and Aaron show that they were firmly on Jehovah’s side ?
( See opening picture . )
Jehovah decided not to eliminate the Israelites .
His mercy gave loyal worshippers an opportunity to take a firm stand on his side .
After witnessing the unrestrained behavior of the people ​ — shouting , singing , and dancing before an idol — ​ Moses crushed the golden calf into powder .

He then proclaimed : “ Who is on Jehovah’s side ?
Come to me ! ”
In response , “ all the Levites gathered around ” Moses . ​ — Ex . 32 : 17 - 20 , 26 .
Although initially involved in setting up the idol , Aaron repented and joined the rest of the Levites on Jehovah’s side . These loyal ones were not just taking sides with Jehovah but were at the same time separating themselves from the wrongdoers .
That was a wise move ; that day thousands lost their lives because of their idolatry .
However , those who were on Jehovah’s side were promised a blessing . ​ — Ex .
32 : 27 - 29 .
What do Paul’s words about the golden calf episode teach us ?
The apostle Paul drew attention to the golden calf episode and warned : “ These things became examples for us , in order for us not to . . . become idolaters , as some of them did .
[ The examples ] were written for a warning to us upon whom the ends of the systems of things have come .
So let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall . ”

As Paul pointed out , even true worshippers could become involved in wrong practices .
Those who give in to temptation may think that they still have a good standing with Jehovah .
But merely wanting to be Jehovah’s friend or claiming to be loyal to him does not always mean that one is actually approved by Jehovah . ​ — 1 Cor .
10 : 1 - 5 .
What could cause us to drift away from Jehovah , and with what consequences ?
Just as the Israelites became anxious over Moses ’ delay in coming down from Sinai , Christians today may feel anxious over the seeming delay of Jehovah’s day of judgment and the coming of the new world .
The fulfillment of these promises may seem too far off in the future or too good to be true .
Left unchecked , such thinking can lead us to put fleshly pursuits ahead of Jehovah’s will .
In time , we could drift away from Jehovah and eventually engage in practices that we would never have considered being involved in when we were in good spiritual health .
What fundamental truth should we never forget , and why ?
Never should we forget that Jehovah requires wholehearted obedience and exclusive devotion .
Any wandering away from Jehovah’s worship really means doing Satan’s will , and that could lead only to disaster .
Hence , Paul reminds us : “ You cannot be drinking the cup of Jehovah and the cup of demons ; you cannot be partaking of ‘ the table of Jehovah ’ and the table of demons . ” ​ — 1 Cor .
10 : 21 .
Even after we take a false step , how can Jehovah help us ?
The Bible accounts about Cain , Solomon , and the Israelites at Mount Sinai have a noteworthy element in common .
These individuals had opportunity to “ repent . . . and turn around . ”
Clearly , Jehovah is not quick to give up on those who take a false step .
In Aaron’s case , Jehovah extended forgiveness .
Today , warnings from Jehovah may come in the form of a Bible account , Bible - based publications , or kind advice from a fellow Christian .
When we heed the warnings , we are assured of Jehovah’s mercy .
What should we be determined to do when our loyalty to Jehovah is put to the test ?
Jehovah’s undeserved kindness has a purpose .
It gives us an opportunity “ to reject ungodliness and worldly desires . ”
( Read Titus 2 : 11 - 14 . )
As long as we live “ amid this present system of things , ” we will face situations that will put our exclusive devotion to Jehovah to the test .
May we always be ready to take a firm stand on his side , for it is ‘ Jehovah our God we should fear , him we should serve , and to him we should cling ’ ! ​ — Deut . 10 : 20 .
“ Happy is the nation whose God is Jehovah , the people he has chosen as his own possession . ” ​ — PS .
33 : 12 .
SONGS : 40 , 50
What are some of the things we accomplish through dedication and baptism ?
Why should it be obvious to others that we are exclusively devoted to Jehovah ?
Why is it important to be hospitable , generous , forgiving , and kind to fellow worshippers ?
Why can Jehovah rightfully claim ownership of everything ?
( See opening picture . )
EVERYTHING belongs to Jehovah !
He owns “ the heavens , even the heavens of the heavens , and the earth with all that is in it . ”
Hence , by reason of their very existence , all humans belong to Jehovah .
Yet , throughout human history , God has designated specific groups of people as belonging to him in a special way .
Who have been identified in the Bible as belonging to Jehovah in a special way ?
For example , Psalm 135 refers to faithful worshippers of Jehovah in ancient Israel as “ his special property . ”
Also , the book of Hosea foretold that some non - Israelites would become Jehovah’s people .
Hosea’s prophecy was fulfilled when Jehovah included non - Jews in his selection of prospective corulers with Christ .
This “ holy nation ” is Jehovah’s “ special possession ” in an outstanding way , its members having been anointed with holy spirit and chosen for life in heaven .
What about the majority of faithful Christians today who have an earthly hope ? Jehovah also calls them his “ people ” and his “ chosen ones . ” ​ — Isa .
65 : 22 .
( a ) Who enjoy a favored relationship with Jehovah today ?
( b ) What will be considered in this article ?
Today , the “ little flock , ” with a heavenly hope , and the “ other sheep , ” with an earthly hope , compose the “ one flock ” that Jehovah highly regards as his people .
We surely want to show deep appreciation to Jehovah for granting us such a favored relationship with him .
This article will consider various ways in which we can show our gratitude to Jehovah for giving us that special honor .
What is one way we can thank Jehovah for making it possible for us to have a relationship with him , and how did Jesus do something similar ?
We show appreciation to Jehovah by wholeheartedly dedicating ourselves to him .
By water baptism , we formally and publicly acknowledge Jehovah’s ownership of us and our willingness to subject ourselves to him .
Jesus did something similar when at his baptism he , in effect , said to Jehovah : “ To do your will , O my God , is my desire . ”
Jesus presented himself to do Jehovah’s will , even though since birth he had been part of a nation dedicated to God .
5 , 6 . ( a ) How did Jehovah respond when Jesus was baptized ?
( b ) Illustrate why Jehovah appreciates our dedication , even though everything belongs to him .
How did Jehovah respond to Jesus ’ baptism ?
The Bible account says : “ After being baptized , Jesus immediately came up from the water ; and look ! the heavens were opened up , and he saw God’s spirit descending like a dove and coming upon him .
Look ! Also , a voice from the heavens said : ‘ This is my Son , the beloved , whom I have approved . ’ ”
Although Jesus already belonged to his heavenly Father , Jehovah was delighted to see his Son’s willingness to do His will exclusively .
Jehovah is likewise pleased to accept our dedication , and he will honor us with his blessing . ​ — Ps . 149 : 4 .
To illustrate , imagine that a man has planted many beautiful flowers in his garden .
One day his little girl picks one of those flowers and offers it to him as a gift .
Did not the flower already belong to the man ? How could she give him something that he already owned ?
A loving father would not even think of such questions .
Rather , he would be delighted to accept the gift as a token of his daughter’s love for him . He would surely treasure that single flower from his daughter above all the other flowers in his garden .
Jehovah is no less delighted when we willingly devote ourselves to him exclusively . ​ — Ex .
34 : 14 .
How did Malachi highlight Jehovah’s feelings toward those who willingly serve him ?
Read Malachi 3 : 16 .
If you are not yet dedicated and baptized , consider the significance of taking such a step .
Granted , from the moment you came into existence , you belonged to Jehovah , along with the rest of mankind .
Yet , think how greatly it would please Jehovah if in recognition of his sovereignty , you were to dedicate yourself to him and do his will .
Jehovah , in turn , recognizes those who willingly serve him , and he writes their names in his “ book of remembrance . ”
8 , 9 .
What does Jehovah require from those whose names are inscribed in his “ book of remembrance ” ?
Having our name inscribed in Jehovah’s “ book of remembrance ” as his people comes with certain obligations .
Malachi specifically stated that we must ‘ fear Jehovah and meditate on his name . ’
Giving our worshipful devotion to anyone or anything else would result in our name being removed from Jehovah’s figurative book of life . ​ — Ex . 32 : 33 ; Ps . 69 : 28 .
Hence , our dedication to Jehovah involves much more than a solemn promise to do his will and to submit to water baptism .
These actions are brief , and they quickly become part of the past .
Our stand on Jehovah’s side as his people requires an ongoing demonstration of our obedience to him both in the present and in the future ​ — for as long as we live . ​ — 1 Pet .
4 : 1 , 2 . What clear distinction must exist between those who serve Jehovah and those who do not ?
The preceding article considered the Bible accounts of Cain , Solomon , and the Israelites .
All of them professed to worship Jehovah , but their devotion to him was far from exclusive .
These examples clearly establish that those who truly belong to Jehovah must firmly take their stand for righteousness and against wickedness .
Appropriately , after Malachi mentioned the “ book of remembrance , ” Jehovah spoke of “ the distinction between a righteous person and a wicked person , between one serving God and one not serving him . ” ​ — Mal . 3 : 18 .
Why should it be obvious to others that we are devoted to Jehovah exclusively ?
Here , then , is another way we can show appreciation to Jehovah for choosing us as his people .
Our spiritual progress must be “ plainly seen by all . ”
Ask yourself : ‘ Is my complete allegiance to Jehovah evident to others ?
Do I look for opportunities to identify myself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses ? ’
Jehovah would be deeply saddened if after he has selected us as his people , we were to hesitate to let others know that we belong to him . ​ — Ps . 119 : 46 ; read Mark 8 : 38 .
Does your lifestyle clearly identify you as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses ?
( See paragraphs 12 , 13 )
12 , 13 .
How have some obscured their identity as Jehovah’s Witnesses ?
Sad to say , some individuals have blurred ‘ the distinction between their serving God and their not serving him ’ by imitating “ the spirit of the world . ”
That is a spirit that caters to ‘ the desires of one’s flesh . ’
For example , despite all the counsel that has been given on the subject , some still prefer styles of dress and grooming that are immodest .
They wear tight - fitting and revealing clothing , even to Christian gatherings .
Or they have adopted extreme haircuts and hairdos .
As a result , when they are in a crowd , it may be difficult to tell who belongs to Jehovah and who is “ a friend of the world . ” ​ — Jas .
4 : 4 . In other ways , some Witnesses have not firmly rejected worldly conduct .
Their dancing and actions at parties go beyond what is acceptable for Christians . They post on social media photos of themselves and comments that are unbecoming to spiritual people .
They may not have been disciplined in the Christian congregation for a serious sin , but they can be a negative influence on their peers who are striving to maintain fine conduct among Jehovah’s people . ​ — Read 1 Peter 2 : 11 , 12 .
Do not let yourself be affected by those who are not taking a firm stand on Jehovah’s side
What course of action is vital if we are to protect our special friendship with Jehovah ?
The world aggressively promotes “ the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life . ”
Yet , because we belong to Jehovah , we are admonished to “ reject ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things . ”
Our speech , our eating and drinking habits , our dress and grooming , our work ethic ​ — everything we do — ​ should tell onlookers that we are exclusively devoted to Jehovah . ​ — Read 1 Corinthians 10 : 31 , 32 .
Why should we treat fellow worshippers with kindness and love ?
Our appreciation for Jehovah’s special friendship is shown in how we treat fellow worshippers .
They too belong to Jehovah .
If we never lose sight of that fact , we will always treat our brothers and sisters with kindness and love .
Jesus said to his followers : “ By this all will know that you are my disciples ​ — if you have love among yourselves . ” ​ — John 13 : 35 .
What example from the Mosaic Law illustrates Jehovah’s feelings toward his people ?
To illustrate how we should treat one another in the congregation , consider the following .
The utensils in Jehovah’s temple were dedicated , or set aside , exclusively for pure worship .
The Mosaic Law outlined in detail how to care for these utensils , and violators were subject to death .
If Jehovah so jealously protected lifeless implements used in his worship , how much more would he protect his dedicated loyal worshippers whom he has chosen as his people !
Speaking to his people , Jehovah once declared : “ Whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye . ” ​ — Zech . 2 : 8 .
Jehovah is “ paying attention and listening ” to what ?
Interestingly , Malachi depicted Jehovah as “ paying attention and listening ” as His people interact with one another .
Jehovah indeed “ knows those who belong to him . ”
He is keenly aware of every single thing we do and say .
When we are less than kind to our fellow worshippers , Jehovah is “ paying attention and listening . ”
When we are hospitable , generous , forgiving , and kind to one another , we can be sure that Jehovah takes notice of that as well . ​ — Heb . 13 : 16 ; 1 Pet .
4 : 8 , 9 .
How can we show appreciation for the honor of being Jehovah’s people ?
Surely we are eager to show our appreciation to Jehovah for the honor of being his people .
We see the wisdom in acknowledging his ownership of us by voluntarily dedicating ourselves to him .
Even while living “ in the midst of a crooked and twisted generation , ” we want people to see that we are “ blameless and innocent , . . . shining as illuminators in the world . ”
We take a firm stand against badness .
And we love and respect our fellow worshippers , recognizing that they too belong to Jehovah . ​ — Rom . 12 : 10 .
How does Jehovah reward those who belong to him ?
The Bible promises : “ Jehovah will not forsake his people . ”
This ironclad guarantee is binding despite any calamity that might befall us .
Even death cannot stand in the way of Jehovah’s love for us .
“ If we live , we live to Jehovah , and if we die , we die to Jehovah .
So both if we live and if we die , we belong to Jehovah . ”
We eagerly look forward to the day when Jehovah will bring to life all his loyal friends who have died .
Even now we enjoy many blessings .
As the Bible says , “ happy is the nation whose God is Jehovah , the people he has chosen as his own possession . ” ​ — Ps .
33 : 12 .
WHEN Jesus taught his disciples how to preach the good news , he acknowledged that the Kingdom message would not always be welcomed .
In our ministry , we may encounter some who respond harshly or even act abusively .

Admittedly , such responses can make it difficult for us to maintain compassion for those to whom we preach .
A compassionate person sees the needs and problems of others , feels sympathy for them , and wants to help .
However , if we begin to lose our compassion for those whom we meet in the ministry , we may also begin to lose our zeal and effectiveness .
On the other hand , when we cultivate compassion , it is as if we were adding more oxygen to a fire ​ — we keep our zeal for the ministry burning brightly ! ​ — 1 Thess .
5 : 19 .
How can we cultivate compassion even when it is challenging to do so ?
Let us consider three examples worthy of imitation ​ — the examples of Jehovah , Jesus , and the apostle Paul .
For thousands of years , Jehovah has endured the reproach that has been brought on his name .
Yet , he remains “ kind toward the unthankful and wicked . ”
His kindness is demonstrated by his patience .
Jehovah desires that “ all sorts of people ” be saved .
Although God hates wickedness , he views humans as precious and does not want any to lose their lives . ​ — 2 Pet . 3 : 9 .
Jehovah understands how effectively Satan has blinded unbelieving humans .
Many have been taught wrong beliefs and attitudes since childhood , making it a challenge for them to accept the truth .

Jehovah is eager to help such ones .
How do we know ?
Consider Jehovah’s view of the ancient Ninevites .
Despite their violent ways , Jehovah said to Jonah : “ Should I not also feel sorry for Nineveh the great city , in which there are more than 120,000 men who do not even know right from wrong ? ”
Jehovah viewed the Ninevites as spiritually disadvantaged , and he mercifully commissioned Jonah to warn them .


Like Jehovah , we view people as precious .
We can imitate him by eagerly trying to help any who might listen , even if they seem unlikely to respond .
Like his Father , Jesus was moved with pity for people who were in spiritual need .
“ On seeing the crowds , he felt pity for them , because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd . ”
Jesus saw beneath the surface ; he recognized that those who came to hear him speak had been taught falsehoods and had been mistreated by their religious leaders .
Although he knew that many would allow various obstacles to hinder them from responding favorably , Jesus still proceeded “ to teach them many things . ” ​ — Mark 4 : 1 - 9 .
Do not be frustrated if a person does not initially show interest
Circumstances in life change , as may a person’s attitude toward the truth
When people react unfavorably to our message , we need to see beneath the surface and ask ourselves why they respond as they do .
Some may have a negative attitude about the Bible or about Christianity because of the bad examples of those who claim to be Christians .
Perhaps others have been told lies about our beliefs . Still others may face the scorn of members of the community or of family members if they receive us favorably .
Some we meet in the ministry may react unfavorably because of traumatic experiences that have left them emotionally damaged .
A missionary named Kim says : “ In a certain part of our territory , many people are victims of a war in which they lost all their possessions .
They have no real hope for the future .
They are frustrated and very distrustful .
In this area , we regularly encounter those opposed to our message .
On one occasion , I was assaulted while preaching . ”
How does Kim maintain her compassion despite such treatment ?
She says : “ When treated abusively , I try to keep in mind Proverbs 19 : 11 , which says : ‘ The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger . ’
Remembering the background of those in our territory helps me to cultivate compassion for them .
And not everyone we meet is hostile .
In that same area , we have some nice return visits . ”
We might ask ourselves , ‘ How would I respond to the Kingdom message if I were in the position of those to whom we preach ? ’
For example , what if we had repeatedly been told lies about Jehovah’s Witnesses ?
In such circumstances , perhaps we too would respond negatively and be in need of compassion .
When we recall Jesus ’ command to treat others as we wish to be treated , we are motivated to respond empathetically even when it is difficult to do so . ​ — Matt .
7 : 12 .
The apostle Paul showed compassion even for violent opposers .
Why ?
He did not forget his own past .
He said : “ Formerly I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man .
Nevertheless , I was shown mercy because I acted in ignorance and with a lack of faith . ”
He recognized that Jehovah and Jesus had shown him great mercy .
Likely , he could see his former self in some of those to whom he preached .
At times , Paul encountered strongly entrenched false beliefs .
How did he react ?
Acts 17 : 16 reports that while Paul was in Athens , “ his spirit within him became irritated on seeing that the city was full of idols . ”
Nevertheless , Paul used the very source of his irritation to give a fine witness .
He adapted his preaching methods to the backgrounds of various types of people so that he “ might by all possible means save some . ” ​ — 1 Cor .
9 : 20 - 23 .
We can imitate Paul by acknowledging negative attitudes or wrong beliefs that we encounter and then by skillfully introducing “ good news of something better . ”
A sister named Dorothy says : “ In our territory , many have been taught that God is harsh and judgmental .
I commend such people for their strong belief in God and then draw their attention to what the Bible says about Jehovah’s loving personality and his promises for the future . ”
As we move deeper into “ the last days , ” we can expect that the attitudes of some to whom we preach “ will advance from bad to worse . ”
But we must not let this downward trend erode our compassion or cause us to lose our joy .
Jehovah can give us the strength to “ keep conquering the evil with the good . ”
A pioneer named Jessica relates : “ I often encounter people who lack humility and who belittle us and our message .
This can be annoying .
When I begin a conversation , I pray silently to Jehovah and ask for his help to see the person as he does .
This takes my focus off of my feelings and instead makes me think about how to help the person . ”
We keep looking for those who are rightly disposed for everlasting life
Some respond to our patient efforts to help them spiritually
We should also consider how to encourage our fellow workers .
Jessica says : “ If one of us has a bad experience , I try not to dwell on it .
Rather , I shift the conversation to positive topics , such as the good that our ministry accomplishes despite the negative responses of some . ”
Jehovah is well - aware of the challenges we encounter in the ministry .
How he must rejoice when we imitate his mercy !
Of course , Jehovah will not extend his compassion indefinitely .
We can be confident that he knows exactly the right time to end this system of things .
Until then , our preaching is urgent .
Let us continue to carry out our assignment with zeal and tender compassion for “ all sorts of people . ”
JOSHUA faces a daunting challenge .
He has to lead the nation of Israel into the Promised Land in the face of formidable obstacles .
Jehovah assures him of success , though , and encourages him : ‘ Be courageous and strong .
Observe my Law . Read it day and night , in order to observe carefully all that is written in it .
Then you will be successful and you will act wisely . ’ ​ — Josh .
1 : 7 , 8 .
In these “ critical times hard to deal with , ” we too face formidable challenges .
Like Joshua , we can succeed by following the advice Jehovah gave him .
We can read the Bible regularly and carefully apply its principles to the tests we face .
However , many of us would admit that we are not the best students and that studying is not easy for us .
Yet , since studying the Bible is so important , review the box “ Try These Suggestions ” for some good tips that can make your study more effective and enjoyable .
“ Guide me in the pathway of your commandments , ” sang the psalmist , “ for in it I take delight . ”
You can derive great pleasure from considering God’s Word .
Rewarding gems are awaiting discovery as you dig for spiritual treasures .

Although you do not have to lead a nation as Joshua did , you have your own challenges to face .
So , like Joshua , study and observe what has been written for your benefit .
When you do , you too will be successful and act wisely .
Pray before you study .
The Bible contains the thoughts of the almighty God that he had recorded for your benefit .
So when you read the Bible , seek his help to understand it , retain it , and apply it in your life . ​ — Ezra 7 : 10 .
Ask yourself questions as you read the Bible or Bible - based literature : ‘ What does this passage tell me about Jehovah ?
How does it contribute to the overall message of his Word ?
How can I use these thoughts to help others ? ’
Meditate on what you study .

Stop reading and think : ‘ How does this material make me feel ?
Why does it make me feel that way ?
How does it relate to my past experiences , to my current situation , or to possible future events ?
How can I apply these Bible principles and this counsel in my life ? ’
See if you can explain why Jehovah urges his people to avoid certain practices or what the consequences of a different course of action would likely be . ​ — Deut . 32 : 28 , 29 .
Use your imagination when reading descriptive passages .
Can you , for example , picture the scene as Joseph’s brothers sell him to the Ishmaelites ?
What do you see , hear , and smell ? Put yourself in the place of the characters .
What are they thinking and feeling ?
Such thoughts will make your study more vivid and meaningful .
Use the study tools that have been provided to enrich your research .
Get familiar with the tools available in your language , both online and in print .
Do not hesitate to ask others to help you learn how to use them effectively .
The Watch Tower Publications Index or the Research Guide for Jehovah’s Witnesses , for example , will help you to locate what has been written on many topics and to find explanations of many Bible verses .

Use the appendixes of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures if available in a language you know .
These provide useful information on geography , chronology , weights and measures , and so on .
Summarize key points in the material to help you remember what you have just studied .
Better still , share it with others .
Is there something you can use in your ministry ?
In these ways , you not only fix the main points in your mind but also use what you have studied to benefit others .
